Predictively Oriented Posteriors
Yann McLatchie⋆1 , Badr-Eddine Chérief-Abdellatif⋆2 , David T. Frazier⋆3 ,
and Jeremias Knoblauch⋆1

arXiv:2510.01915v2 [stat.ME] 20 Feb 2026

1

Department of Statistical Science, University College London
2
CNRS, Sorbonne Université
3
Department of Econometrics and Business Statistics, Monash University

Abstract
We advocate for a new statistical principle that combines the most desirable
aspects of both parameter inference and density estimation. This leads us to the
predictively oriented (PrO) posterior, which expresses uncertainty as a consequence
of predictive ability. Doing so leads to inferences which predictively dominate both
classical and generalised Bayes posterior predictive distributions: up to logarithmic factors, PrO posteriors converge to the predictively optimal model average.
Whereas classical and generalised Bayes posteriors only achieve this rate if the model
can recover the data-generating process, PrO posteriors adapt to the level of model
misspecification. This means that they concentrate around the true model in the
same way as Bayes and Gibbs posteriors if the model can recover the data-generating
distribution, but do not concentrate in the presence of non-trivial forms of model misspecification. Instead, they stabilise towards a predictively optimal posterior whose
degree of irreducible uncertainty admits an interpretation as the degree of model
misspecification—a sharp contrast to how Bayesian uncertainty and its existing extensions behave. Lastly, we show that PrO posteriors can be sampled from by
evolving particles based on mean field Langevin dynamics, and verify the practical
significance of our theoretical developments on a number of numerical examples.

Often motivated through its favourable decision-theoretic properties, the primary goal of
Bayesian statistical inference is to quantify uncertainty about a parameter of interest given a
set of prior beliefs (e.g. Robert et al., 2007). All other inferential tasks are derivatives of this
primary directive. In the current era of black-box prediction models and the wide-spread
adoption of machine learning techniques across science and society, this principle leads
⋆

All authors contributed equally. Corresponding author: j.knoblauch@ucl.ac.uk

1

to a fundamental tension with Bayesian statistical methods: in many modern problems,
prediction is the primary goal of interest, with parameter inference being only a secondary
concern. Because much of Bayesian methodology is centered on parameter inference, its
predictive performance quickly falters outside of the narrow conditions that make Bayesian
belief updates optimal (see Zellner, 1988; Aitchison, 1975). In other words, the practice of
Bayesian statistics is overwhelmingly focused on parameter inference, not prediction.
One of the clearest ways in which this manifests is posterior collapse: as data accumulate, the Bayes posterior generally concentrates around a single parameter value (see e.g
van der Vaart, 1998, Section 10.2). This is sensible for parameter inference when
uncertainty in a parameter of interest arises due to missing observations. If a
complete population is observed, then the parameter of interest can be assumed
to be known precisely.
(Fong et al., 2023)
In the context of prediction however, posterior collapse is generally not desirable: it implies
that as the sample size increases, marginalising over the Bayes posterior ceases to function
as a genuine combination of individual predictive distributions. Instead of averaging over
models, such predictive distributions essentially predict from a single model. Crucially,
this behaviour persists even for generalised Bayesian methods that replace a likelihoodbased approach with a loss-based belief update (Bissiri et al., 2016; Jiang and Tanner,
2008; Zhang, 2006; Knoblauch et al., 2022; Alquier, 2024; Syring and Martin, 2019; Martin
and Syring, 2022). As a result, the posterior predictives obtained from both classical and
generalised Bayes approaches quickly resemble those obtained from a point estimator as
sample size grows (McLatchie et al., 2025).
To better understand the impact of this phenomenon on prediction, it is useful to
2

distinguish between two regimes. When a statistical model is well-specified so that the
data-generating process is recoverable by a singular parameter value, posterior concentration is the desired outcome: as more data accumulates, uncertainty contracts around the
true parameter, and the posterior predictive distribution is well-calibrated. In practice
however, statistical analysis is almost always subject to some degree of model misspecification. In this regime, no single parameter value is capable of describing the data generating
process, so that the posterior predictives based on standard or generalised Bayesian posteriors become poorly calibrated (Syring and Martin, 2019). Importantly, this issue is not
caused by obtaining predictive distributions through the marginalisation of a posterior,
but by marginalising over a posterior which collapses to a point mass. This in turn provides strong motivation for methods whose parameter uncertainty can be guaranteed not
to collapse to a point mass when this
is appropriate and desirable, since [...] some uncertainty always remains about
the true (idealised) distribution, no matter how much data are observed.
(Miller and Dunson, 2019)
In this paper, we synthesise the above discussion into a new statistical principle for
inference that results in a predictively oriented (PrO) posterior. The resulting approach is
distinct from existing inference frameworks in two main ways: first, it treats prediction as
its main goal without requiring a black box approach, while naturally inducing uncertainty
quantification for a parameter of interest as a secondary inferential outcome; second, it
is adaptive: the PrO posterior collapses to a point mass only in the appropriate setting
where the model is well-specified. When the model is misspecified however, PrO posteriors
acknowledge that no single parameter is sufficient for capturing the true data-generating
process, and yield an irreducible level of uncertainty, even with increasing sample size.
3

Conceptually, PrO posteriors represent a useful intermediary between existing statistical paradigms and compromise between the two tenants of data modelling and algorithmic
modelling sub-cultures in statistics that were famously identified by Breiman (2001). In
practical terms, this means that PrO posteriors reconcile parameter inference and predictive inference in situations where the choice between either is difficult. Intriguingly, they do
so through a posterior that expresses epistemic uncertainty in a way that is meaningfully
distinct from standard and generalised Bayesian approaches.
We strengthen this intuitive appeal by demonstrating that PrO posteriors possess
strong theoretical guarantees and an algorithmically viable approach for computation. To
do so, we first set the scene and formally introduce PrO posteriors (Section 1). Next, we
investigate the nature of the uncertainty which they confer, show that they are adaptive to
model misspecification, and explain their broader place in the statistical sciences (Section
2). From there, we go on to formally establish that PrO posteriors predictively dominate
classical and generalised Bayesian posteriors, and characterise their asymptotic behaviour
(Sections 3 and 8). We end by introducing a sampling algorithm which can be used to
sample from PrO posteriors (Section 6), exploring their empirical performance on a range
of examples (Section 5), and providing a discussion of our findings (Section 7).

1

Background

Throughout, we consider data x1:n = (x1 , . . . , xn ) for xi ∈ X and i = 1, . . . , n. We assume that x1:n was generated from an unknown distribution P0 . With this, we denote
expectations of a function f : X → R with respect to P0 by E[f (X)] or by EX∼P0 [f (X)]
if we wish to emphasise the sampling distribution. To learn about P0 from x1:n , we follow
the tenants of classical Bayesian analysis, and posit a model class MΘ := {Pθ : θ ∈ Θ}
4

and a prior Π ∈ P(Θ) over elements of MΘ , where P(Θ) denotes the space of probability
measures on Θ. Instead of attempting to learn the best possible parameter, as in classical
(or even generalised) Bayesian inference, we focus on learning the best possible predictive
distribution. To rigorously formulate this optimality, we use scoring rules.
Definition 1 (Scoring Rule). Let S : P(X ) × X → R ∪ {∞} be an extended real-valued
function. Then S is a proper scoring rule, relative to a class P, if:
(i) the expected score S(P, P ′ ) := EX∼P ′ {S(P, X)}, is finite for some P, P ′ ∈ P;
(ii) S(P ′ , P ′ ) ≤ S(P, P ′ ) for all P, P ′ ∈ P, so that S induces the statistical divergence
DS (P, P ′ ) := S(P, P ′ ) − S(P ′ , P ′ ) ≥ 0 for which DS (P, P ′ ) = 0 ⇐⇒ P = P ′ .
Scoring rules are foundational statistical objects concerned with measuring accuracy
of predictive distributions (see, e.g., Gneiting and Raftery, 2007). Given a target distribution P0 , a candidate predictive distribution P is judged to be more accurate than
an alternative candidate P ′ by an expected score S if and only if S(P, P0 ) ≤ S(P ′ , P0 ).
The logarithmic scoring rule, given by S(P, x) = − log dP (x), is the most common example and is related to the Kullback-Leibler divergence via KL(P ′ ∥P ) = DS (P, P ′ ). Other
popular choices include the spherical score, cumulative ranked probability score (CRPS),
the energy score, and squared maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), which for a kernel function k : X × X → R+ and the Dirac measure at x denoted by δx is given by
MMD2 (P, δx ) := EX∼P,X ′ ∼P [k(X, X ′ )] + k(x, x) − 2EX∼P [k(X, x)].

1.1

Key Ideas

The Bayes posterior Πn and its associated posterior predictive distribution are
R
dPθ (x1:n )dΠ(θ)
Πn (A) := RA
,
dPθ (x1:n )dΠ(θ)
Θ
5

Z
PΠn :=

Pθ dΠn (θ).
Θ

In this set-up, the predictive distribution PΠn is derived as a consequence of the Bayes
posterior Πn —which itself is primarily geared towards quantifying the uncertainty about
which parameter θ best describes the observed data x1:n . In this paper, we reverse that
R
order: the posterior predictive PQ := Θ Pθ dQ(θ) is the object of interest, and we obtain
a predictively oriented (PrO) posterior as the measure Qn which quantifies uncertainty
about θ in a manner that is optimal for prediction.
The key motivation for this novel methodology is that while PΠn is predictively optimal if P0 ∈ MΘ (see Aitchison, 1975), this optimality breaks down once P0 ∈
/ MΘ .
Indeed, the Bayes posterior predictive can yield extremely poor predictive performance
under even seemingly innocuous model misspecification (see Grünwald and van Ommen,
2017). Though this is well-understood, robust Bayesian methods usually still treat prediction as a second-order concern, and are more concerned with parameter uncertainty. One
family emblematic of this kind of research are Gibbs posteriors (e.g. Zhang, 2006; Jiang and
Tanner, 2008; Jewson et al., 2018; Knoblauch et al., 2018; Giummolè et al., 2019; Syring
and Martin, 2019; Schmon et al., 2020; Chérief-Abdellatif and Alquier, 2020; Matsubara
et al., 2022; Martin and Syring, 2022; Matsubara et al., 2023; Altamirano et al., 2023a,b;
Duran-Martin et al., 2024; McLatchie et al., 2025; Laplante et al., 2025; Frazier et al.,
2025). Many of these posteriors are based on an scoring rule evaluated on the sample, and
for A ⊆ Θ are given by

R
P
exp − λnn ni=1 S(Pθ , xi )
†
A
 λn Pn
Qn (A) := R
exp
−n
i=1 S(Pθ , xi )
Θ

dΠ(θ)
,
dΠ(θ)

Z
PQ†n :=

Pθ dQ†n (θ),

Θ

where the tuning parameter λn is often called the learning rate. Using Gibbs posteriors for
parameter inference is often called generalised Bayesian inference because they recover the
Bayes posterior for the special case where S is the logarithmic scoring rule and λn = n. To
contrast them with PrO posteriors, it will prove instructive to rewrite Gibbs posteriors as
6

the outcome of the following variational optimisation problem:
)
(
n Z
X
λ
n
S(Pθ , xi )dQ(θ) + KL(Q∥Π) .
Q†n = argmin
n i=1
Q∈P(Θ)

(1)

The above representation is well-established (see e.g., Theorem 1 of Knoblauch et al., 2022),
and makes clear that all Gibbs posteriors—including the Bayes posterior—seek to minimise
the averaged scoring rule, rather than the score of the averaged model. This in turn means
that the inferences they produce are targeted towards finding the parameter, rather than
the predictive, which best describes the data. Crucially, these two goals do not overlap
outside of well-specified models, where P0 ∈ MΘ (see Aitchison, 1975). The result is that
in empirical applications, Bayes posteriors and Gibbs posteriors alike often deliver poorly
performing posterior predictives.
What then should we do if we wish to conduct inference on model parameters, but wish
to ensure that the prediction made under the model are accurate, while also suspecting
that P0 ∈
/ MΘ ? We argue that, while the parameters of interest remain θ ∈ Θ, we should
ensure that the beliefs are generated in such a way that the resulting posterior predictive
R
PQ := Pθ dQ(θ) is accurate. To do so, we must score the predictive PQ directly, which
gives rise to what we shall call the predictively oriented (PrO) posterior given by
(
)
n
λn X
S (PQ , xi ) + KL(Q∥Π) .
Qn = argmin
n i=1
Q∈P(Θ)

(2)

The PrO posterior can also be represented explicitly through a fixed point equation as
(
)
n
λn X δS(PQ , xi )
dQn (θ) ∝ dΠ(θ) · exp −
(θ) ,
n i=1
δQ
Q=Qn
where

δS(PQ ,x)
denotes the functional derivative of S(PQ , x) with respect to Q evaluδQ
Q=Qn

ated at Q = Qn (see also Appendix B.1). While generally of limited use for gaining intuition
about its behaviour, this representation illustrates that the PrO posterior is generally not
a coherent belief update in the sense of Bissiri et al. (2016).
7

1.2

Related Work

Approaches and ideas conceptually related to PrO posteriors have appeared in the machine
learning literature under a variety of names and motivations. One prominent line of work is
rooted in PAC-Bayesian analyses that introduce diversity into an ensemble such as weighted
majority voting, whereby a set of classifiers are assigned weights, and the final prediction
is the label supported by the largest total weight across the ensemble (Lacasse et al.,
2006; Laviolette et al., 2011; Germain et al., 2015; Laviolette et al., 2017; Lorenzen et al.,
2019; Masegosa et al., 2020; Viallard et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Wu and Seldin, 2022;
Vignault et al., 2023; Theisen et al., 2024). Related PAC-Bayesian perspectives extending
beyond majority voting have also been explored by Audibert (2004), Ortega et al. (2022),
Hauptvogel and Igel (2024) and Pitas et al. (2025).
More directly related is the recent work of Shen et al. (2025), which proposes the special
case of (2) with the MMD in the context of misspecified deterministic simulation models
as a heuristic approach “for arresting the collapse of predictive uncertainty” to avoid that
“posterior predictions become deterministic.” This is very different from what we study in
the remainder: Shen et al. (2025) make no attempt at advocating for the general formulation
in (2) as a new general-purpose methodology for parameter and predictive inference, and
do not provide any rigorous investigation into its behaviour.
Several alternative heuristic variational approaches targeting objectives similar to (2)
have also been suggested elsewhere (see Wang and Liu, 2019; Sheth and Khardon, 2020;
Wei et al., 2021; Jankowiak et al., 2020b,a; Lai and Yao, 2024). Amongst these, the most
relevant for our remaining developments are two papers studying PAC-Bayesian guarantees
for the special case of an approximated logarithmic scoring rule termed PAC2T -variational
posterior (Masegosa, 2020) and PACm -Bayes (Morningstar et al., 2022). Despite superfi-

8

cial similarities, our development differs significantly from these precursors in both form
and function. Most critically, this vein of prior work does not define or study the PrO
posterior. Instead, the focus is on deriving computationally efficient methods for Bayesian
deep learning via variational approximation algorithms informed by objectives similar to
(2), as well as the derivation of PAC-Bayes bounds to justify these algorithms.
In summary, previous contributions studying objectives and objects with similarities to
(2) are limited in scope, motivated heuristically, and do not explore the promise of PrO
posteriors as a new and universally applicable inferential methodology. In the remainder, we
rectify this: we provide practically meaningful guarantees for PrO posteriors and study
the nature of the uncertainty they communicate. Based on our findings, we argue that
PrO posteriors provide a new form of uncertainty quantification, and are uniquely suited
to address the predictively oriented inferences that scientists are increasingly demanding
from the statistical sciences.

2

A Motivating Example

Throughout, robustness to model misspecification is an important motivation in our development of PrO posteriors. Robustness is also one of the key drivers behind many Gibbs
posteriors, usually to guard against Huber contamination (Altamirano et al., 2023a,b; Matsubara et al., 2022, 2023; Laplante et al., 2025; Duran-Martin et al., 2024; Marusic et al.,
2025) . Whenever the nature of misspecification is more complicated than can be described
through an outlier model of the Huber type, these approaches fail to provide robustness.
To contrast this behaviour with that of PrO posteriors, we consider a linear regression
model which for xi ∈ R, zi ∈ R2 and i = 1, . . . n is given by
xi = zi⊤ θ + εi .
9

Figure 1: The Gibbs and PrO posterior distributions under different forms of model misspecification. Coefficients θ1 , θ2 are shown as black crosses, with θ1 = θ2 under trivial misspecification.

Here, we make two assumptions: the parameter of interest θ ∈ R2 is fixed but unknown,
iid

and εi ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) for a fixed and known noise level σ 2 . Relative to this model for the data,
we explore three different forms of misspecification:
iid

(T) Heavy-tailed observation noise εi ∼ t3 (0, σ 2 );
iid

(CR) Random coefficients θ2 = 2 · (−1)ξi , with ξi ∼ Ber(1/2) sampled from a Bernoulli;
iid

iid

(NT) The combined effect of εi ∼ t3 (0, σ 2 ) and θ2 = 2 · (−1)ξi with ξi ∼ Ber(1/2).
The first setting constitutes a form of trivial (T) misspecification: the inflated noise
leads to overconfident inferences, but does not compromise the meaning of the model
parameter θ. In line with this, we would expect both Gibbs and PrO posteriors to perform
reasonably well at identifying the general location of this parameter. In contrast, the
10

second setting fundamentally compromises the interpretation of inferences on θ. However, it
allows convex recovery (CR): a 2-component mixture over the misspecified linear regression
model recovers the actual data-generating process. While Gibbs posteriors will be adversely
affected by this setting, PrO posteriors will be able to recover the true data-generating
process exactly. The last setting merges both of the previous complications, and constitutes
a form of non-trivial (NT) misspecification: not even convex combinations of the original
model class will recover the true data-generating process exactly. Still, we expect that the
PrO posterior will perform well, since a convex combination of the original model will get
us very close to the true data-generating mechanism.

2.1

Numerical Results

Our numerical results confirm these intuitions, and are summarised in Figures 1, where we
compare posterior inferences for Gibbs and PrO posteriors based on the MMD in all three
settings, with implementation details and further information deferred to Appendix D.4.
Unlike the Gibbs posterior, the PrO posterior performs uncertainty quantification for both

Figure 2: Mean and standard error of Gibbs posterior’s predictive loss relative to PrO posteriors
evaluated using negative log likelihood (NLL), squared MMD (MMD2 ), and Continuous Ranked
Probability Score (CRPS) on a test set for different forms of misspecification.

11

convex recovery and the non-trivially misspecified setting by accounting for the distortions
of the data-generating mechanism relative to the posited simple linear regression. Even in
the trivially misspecified setting, the PrO posterior’s parameter uncertainty seems a more
appropriate reflection of the true underlying uncertainty. The reason is that the PrO
posterior is driven by its implied predictive distribution, and therefore is more sensitive to
the inflated noise in the trivially misspecified setting. Figure 2 translates the impact of
parameter uncertainty into predictive performance, and shows an even clearer advantage
of the resulting PrO posterior predictive distributions.

2.2

A Taxonomy of Model Misspecification

Based on these observations, it will prove useful to rigorously define this so far intuitively
motivated taxonomy of model misspecification. As we shall see later, doing so will prove
critical for comparing the behaviours of Gibbs and PrO posteriors.
Definition 2. We say that MΘ is well-specified if P0 ∈ MΘ , and misspecified if P0 ∈
/ MΘ .
Further, we call a misspecified MΘ trivially misspecified with respect to a scoring rule S if
there exists θ′ ∈ Θ so that inf Q∈P(Θ) S(PQ , P0 ) ≥ S(Pθ′ , P0 ), and non-trivially misspecified
if S(PQ , P0 ) < inf θ∈Θ S(Pθ , P0 ) for some Q ∈ P(Θ). Further, we say that a misspecified
MΘ allows convex recovery if there exists Q ∈ P(Θ) such that PQ = P0 .
To aid understanding, Figure 3 provides an illustration of these different forms of model
misspecification. What we call non-trivial misspecification is a generalisation of what
Grünwald and van Ommen (2017) termed “bad misspecification”. Convex recovery is a
special case of this, and implies that the extended model class {PQ : Q ∈ P(Θ)} obtained
via convex combinations of MΘ contains P0 .

12

MΘ

MΘ
Pθ ⋆

Pθ1

Pθ 1

Pθ ⋆

PQ ⋆

Pθ⋆ = arg minθ S(Pθ , P0 )

Pθ 2

P0

P0

(a) Trivial misspecification.

MΘ

P0 = PQ⋆

(b) Non-trivial misspecification.

Pθ 2

(c) Convex recovery.

Figure 3: Illustration of key ideas introduced in Definition 2. Panel (a) depicts trivial model misspecification: relative to the chosen score S, a singular element of MΘ provides the best fit for P0 ,
and there is no benefit to averaging. In contrast, Panel (b) illustrates the case of non-trivial model
misspecification: constructing Q⋆ := argminQ S(PQ , P0 ) as a convex combination of Pθ1 and Pθ2
yields a better predictive for P0 than any one point in MΘ . Panel (c) provides pictorial intuition
for convex recoverability: it is the special case where PQ⋆ and P0 coincide.

3

Formal Guarantees

The motivating example in the previous section shows empirically that PrO posteriors
adapt to model misspecification: when the model is well-specified, they behave like Gibbs
or Bayes posteriors, but deliver fundamentally different behaviours when the model is misspecified. In this section, we clarify this adaptivity and formally show that PrO posteriors
are predictively superior to Bayes and Gibbs posteriors. Throughout, we will often use
the shorthand predictive scoring rule to refer to a scoring rule S(PQ , x) applied directly to
R
score a predictive distribution PQ = Pθ dQ(θ). Additionally, for two sequences an , bn we
write an ≲ bn to mean that an ≤ Cbn for all n large enough and some universal constant
C > 0. Further, we say that an ≍ bn if an ≲ bn and bn ≲ an .

13

3.1

Regularity conditions

Throughout, we impose a minimal convexity assumption satisfied by virtually all scoring
rules of interest—including kernel scoring rules and the logarithmic score.
Assumption 1. The scoring rule S(·, x) is convex in its first argument for all x ∈ X , and
its corresponding divergence DS is jointly convex in both arguments.
In addition to convexity of the scoring rule, we require regularity conditions on their
expectations. While less restrictive conditions can be obtained, the following regularity
condition is easy to state, and suffices for our theoretical analysis.
Assumption 2. Let rn be a positive sequence such that rn → 0 as n → ∞ and PΠ (Θ) :=


P
{Q ∈ P(Θ) : Q ≪ Π}, it holds that E supQ∈PΠ (Θ) n1 ni=1 S(PQ , Xi ) − S(PQ , P0 ) ≲ rn .
As the speed at which the sequence rn decays depends on the scoring rule, we state it
in full generality. For the special case of bounded scoring rules, rn will always be of order
log(n)/n1/2 . Further, even for unbounded scoring rules such as the logarithmic scoring rule,
the rate log(n)/n1/2 is achievable at the expense of additional restrictions and technicalities
using techniques such as those in Ghosal and Van Der Vaart (2001). For further discussion
and details, see Section 8.
Though Assumption 2 is satisfied by many scoring rules, more interpretable alternatives
exist. In particular, Assumption 1 and Jensen’s inequality imply that
Z
S (PQ , x) =

S (Pθ , x) dQ(θ) − ∆(Q, x),

(3)

for all x ∈ X and some non-negative remainder term ∆ : P(Θ) × X → R+ . In many
cases, such as the log predictive score, this remainder does not simplify further. However,
kernel scoring rules (Gneiting et al., 2007) can be written as an expectation over a product
14

measure in Θ for any x ∈ X (see Lemma 2 in Appendix B), so that the predictive score is
Z
S (PQ , x) =

k

{S(Pθ1 , xi ) − δ(xi ; θ1 , . . . , θk )} dQ (θ1:k );
|
{z
}
=: L(θ1:k , x)

k

Q (θ1:k ) =

k
O

Q(θj ).

(4)

j=1

for some function δ : X × Θk → R+ with k ∈ N+ . This representation allows us to replace
Assumption 2 with more interpretable and testable conditions.
Assumption 2′ . The predictive scoring rule satisfies (4) and for any φ ∈ Θ, if θ1:k =
(φ, φ, . . . φ), then δ(x; φ, . . . , φ) = 0, for all x ∈ X . Further, for any λ ∈ R, L(θ1:k ) :=
i
R h
1 Pn
2 2
E[L(θ1:k , X)], and some C > 0, E eλ{L(θ1:k )− n i=1 L(θ1:k ,Xi )} dΠk (θ1:k ) ≤ eλ C /n .
Here, the first part of Assumption 2′ is a mild regularity condition, and automatically
satisfied by kernel scoring rules for k = 2. The second part imposes a Hoeffding-type
moment condition that generally has to be verified, and which is very similar to those
clasically arising in the study of Gibbs posteriors. Though easier to verify, certain scores
such as the logarithmic scoring rule violate Assumption 2′ , so that the more abstract
conditions imposed by Assumption 2 must be maintained instead.

3.2

Key Results

Having established the necessary regularity conditions, we proceed by studying the impact
of different misspecification regimes on PrO posteriors Qn , and compare them to Gibbs
posteriors Q†n constructed using the same scoring rule. To state our results, we define




log(n)/n1/2 ,
if Assumption 2′ is satisfied;
νn =
(5)



max{log(n)/n1/2 , r }, if Assumption 2 is satisfied,
n

and take λn ≍ n1/2 up to logarithmic factors. This allows us to state our first key result
on the predictive performance of PrO posteriors.
15

Theorem 1. Assumption 1 is satisfied, and Assumption 2 or 2′ holds. Under prior regularity conditions, the following holds for n sufficiently large:
(WS) If the model is well-specified, E [DS (PQn , P0 )] − E[DS (PQ†n , P0 )] ≲ νn ;
(NT) If the model is non-trivially misspecified, E [DS (PQn , P0 )] < E[DS (PQ†n , P0 )],
and E [DS (PQn , P0 )] − inf Q∈P(Θ) DS (PQ , P0 ) ≲ νn ;
(CR) If the model allows convex recovery, then E [DS (PQn , P0 )] ≲ νn .
Theorem 1 evaluates the PrO posterior predictive PQn and its relationship to the Gibbs
posterior predictive PQ†n in terms of the divergence DS induced by the score chosen to
construct both posteriors. (WS) concerns the well-specified setting. Here, Gibbs posteriors
typically concentrate towards the correct model parameter at the usual log(n)/n1/2 rate.
As the result shows, the difference in predictive performance between PrO posteriors
and Gibbs posteriors in this setting is small, and usually of order log(n)/n1/2 . For the
case of non-trivial misspecification studied in (NT), the situation changes: now, the PrO
posteriors strictly outperforms Bayes and Gibbs posteriors. In particular, this performance
gap will be of order inf θ∈Θ DS (Pθ , P0 ) − inf Q∈P(Θ) DS (PQ , P0 ), which grows larger as the
benefits of averaging over MΘ become more pronounced. To confirm this intuition, the
result in (CR) considers the special case of convex recovery, where inf Q∈P(Θ) DS (PQ , P0 ) = 0.
As expected, the PrO posterior recovers the true data-generating process at rate νn . In
contrast, the Gibbs posterior predictive PQ†n never recovers the true data generating process
in this setting, and instead collapses onto a point mass at θ⋆ = argminθ∈Θ DS (Pθ , P0 ).
Lastly, the result also shows that the only case in which the choice of scoring rule has
a notable impact is the non-trivially misspecified case: when the model satisfies convex
recovery or is well-specified, any scoring rule will recover the same predictive distribution

16

for n sufficiently large. This suggests that PrO posteriors are generally less sensitive to
the choice of scoring rule than Gibbs posteriors.
The above result validates the use of PrO posteriors whenever predictive performance
matters, but sheds little light on the qualitative behaviour of PrO posteriors as expressions
of parameter uncertainty. Given that they no longer collapse to a point mass, is it safe
to assume that they behave well as the sample size increases? Indeed, in the context of
parameter inference, convergence to a limiting distribution as more data are observed is
fundamental to ensure that one is learning a well-defined target. Our second result assuages
these concerns, and shows that PrO posteriors do indeed converge to a well-defined target
given by the predictively optimal model average Q∗ := argminQ∈P(Θ) DS (PQ , P0 ). Below,
we state this convergence relative to a distance d defined on probability distributions and
dependent on additional regularity conditions (see Section 8 for details).
Corollary 1. Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 or 2′ holds. Under convex recovery and
additional regularity conditions, there exists α > 0 so that E[d(Qn , Q⋆ )] ≤ C(log n/n1/2 )1/α .
While the above result relies on convex recovery, our empirical results strongly suggest
that this is an artifact of our proof technique, and that this behaviour should be expected
to hold under much weaker conditions.

4

Parameter Uncertainty of the PrO Posterior

In his prescient contribution, Breiman (2001) identified two divergent sub-cultures within
statistical science. On the one hand, he spoke of a data modelling culture interested in handtailoring interpretable models for a given research problem and thus strongly associated
to classical statistical concerns. On the other hand, he identified an increasing interest in

17

machine learning and the associated algorithmic modelling culture focused on predictive
accuracy and black box density estimation techniques.
We believe that PrO posteriors constitute a meaningful and novel attempt to incorporate the most useful aspects of both modelling cultures: they rely on interpretable parameters born out of the data modelling culture, but gear inference towards predictive accuracy.
When both interpretability and predictive performance are relevant, practitioners are often
forced into a fraught choice: should they prefer an interpretable but predictively suboptimal
model; or should they resort to a black box model that will improve predictive performance
at the cost of interpretability and meaningful guarantees? PrO posteriors circumvent this
binary choice. Figure 4, illustrates this by using body measurements for different penguin
species in the Palmer Archipelago (Horst et al., 2020). Here, the PrO posterior not only
identifies the data set’s fundamental structure by correctly discovering the three different
species in it, but also produces a predictive distribution of excellent quality. This behaviour
is desirable for a wide array of scientific problems, and yields an altogether new kind of
epistemic uncertainty which differs starkly from what is currently attainable in classical
Bayesian inference and its generalisations.

4.1

The Origin of PrO Posterior Uncertainty

It is worth contrasting PrO posterior uncertainty with a set of ideas and methods known
under the umbrella of predictive Bayes (see e.g. Berti et al., 2021; Fortini and Petrone,
2020, 2023; Fong et al., 2023; Fortini and Petrone, 2025). Despite similar sounding names,
the roles played by prediction in the construction of PrO posteriors and predictive Bayes
approaches are fundamentally different: the PrO posterior is geared towards learning
the predictive from seen data, predictive Bayes approaches instead posits a sequence of

18

Figure 4: Palmer penguins example. We plot both the kernel density estimate (KDE) and the
PrO posterior predictive overlaid with the data (left, middle), as well as the PrO posterior
overlaid with the average measurements for each of the three penguin species in the data set (right).
For inference with the PrO posterior, we use a bivariate Gaussian model. The results show that
the PrO posterior not only correctly identifies the three penguin species in the data (right), but
also provides a predictive distribution which can fit the observed data as well as a kernel density
estimator. For further details, see Appendix D.2.

predictive distributions to model the unseen data. Put differently, while PrO posteriors
make the predictive distribution the object of posterior inference, predictive Bayes methods
specify predictive distributions instead of priors and likelihoods.
In fact, priors and likelihoods can be recast as a convenient way of specifying a sequence
of predictive distributions on unseen data: formalising this in a recent read paper at the
Royal Statistical Society, Fong et al. (2023) used Doob’s Theorem to argue that the source
of Bayesian uncertainty is unseen data. Taken to its logical extreme, if we observe the entire
population P0 , no epistemic uncertainty remains, and Bayesian methods become perfectly
confident in the conclusions they draw from data. In fact, this same logic applies to various
generalisations of Bayesian uncertainty, including Gibbs posteriors.
But should epistemic uncertainty indeed vanish as more data are observed? Though it
19

may be tempting to answer this question in the affirmative, doing so would overlook an
important practical limitation: for interpretability and computational feasibility, statistical
methods express epistemic uncertainty relative to a parameter θ ∈ Θ. Crucially, this
implies that the only setting in which larger sample sizes should lead to a collapse of
parameter uncertainty is the rare situation where a singular value of θ ∈ Θ can summarise
all properties of P0 that we are interested in. In other words, the epistemic uncertainty
conferred by (generalised) Bayesian methods is constructed relative only to a fixed model
class, not with respect to the choice of model class itself, which renders inference and
uncertainty quantification unreliable whenever P0 ∈
/ MΘ .
The epistemic uncertainty produced by PrO posteriors is more expansive: it delivers
both parameter uncertainty and uncertainty about the inherent ability of MΘ to adequately
explain the observed data. Indeed, when the model is misspecified, PrO posteriors generally do not collapse to a single element of MΘ as more data are observed. When P0 ∈
/ MΘ ,
they instead stabilise towards an irreducible form of uncertainty that originates in the fact
that no single value of θ ∈ Θ is sufficient to summarise all properties of P0 we take an
interest in. This is epistemic uncertainty in its truest form: because the model is misspecified, we should be uncertain about its ability to represent the observed data, even if we
had observed the entire population P0 .
But what if the model is well-specified, so that P0 ∈ MΘ ? In this case, the epistemic
uncertainty produced by Bayes and Gibbs posteriors is sufficient: there exists some θ ∈ Θ
that allows us to completely describe the observed data—and as more data accumulates,
we should become increasingly certain about the ability of this value to correctly explain
the data, and hence P0 . Remarkably, for this special case where the model is well-specified,
PrO posteriors do behave like Bayes and Gibbs posteriors, and likewise concentrate to-

20

wards the parameter value that recovers P0 .

4.2

Key Comparisons

To round off the above discussion, we contrast the behaviour of PrO posteriors to that
of several other related approaches like standard Bayesian inference, Martingale posteriors
(Fong et al., 2023), and mixture models. We do so using the golf putting data of Gelman
and Nolan (2002), which compares the probability of a successful put (x ∈ {0, 1}) by
professional golfers to the distance (z ∈ R) from which the shot was made for n = 5, 988
shots. Throughout, we fit this data using the logistic regression model

1−x
PθLRM (x | z) = σ(θ⊤ z)x 1 − σ(θ⊤ z)
for σ(θ⊤ z) = {1 + exp(θ1 + θ2 z)}−1 ,

(6)

and chart uncertainty estimates across several methods that derive from this set-up.

Figure 5: Golf putting data. Points represent the proportion of successful putts made by professional
golfers as a function of the distance from the hole. The first row shows the predictive mean and
one standard deviation intervals of the Bayes, Martingale, and PrO posteriors. The second row
shows the marginals of the corresponding parameter posteriors.

21

4.2.1

Bayes Posterior and Martingale Posterior Uncertainty

First, we compare PrO posterior uncertainty with classical Bayes posteriors and a Martingale posterior (Fong et al., 2023) based on the Bayesian bootstrap and the negative log
likelihood loss (see Lyddon et al., 2019; Rubin, 1981), and display the results in Figure
5. Bayes posteriors and Martingale posteriors are built around the idea that a single parameter is sufficient to summarise the data-generating process, and that the only source
of uncertainty is unseen data. Accordingly, both produce posteriors that concentrate onto
a single parameter value. Their predictive distributions mirror this, and are qualitatively
similar to what one would obtain by using the maximum likelihood estimator to construct
a plug-in predictive distribution (see McLatchie et al., 2025). This sharply contrasts with
the behaviour of the PrO posterior: its predictive distribution indicates that while the
success of short puts can be estimated with some fidelity, the success of longer puts is associated with substantive levels of uncertainty. One possible explanation of this phenomenon
is that the logistic regression model is too coarse, and that there are in fact two sub-groups
of professional golfers: those that are very proficient at longer puts, and those that are
not. This hypothesis is backed up by the PrO posterior on θ2 , a parameter which models
the effect of distance on the probability of a successful put: unlike the Bayes posterior or
the Martingale posterior, the marginal PrO posterior of θ2 has two modes which could
account for these two sub-groups. To investigate this effect more carefully, we also compute
the posterior marginal effect of distance on the probability of a successful put, which for a
posterior Q can be calculated as
Z

∂PθLRM (x | z)
dQ(θ) =
∂z

Z

θ2 · PθLRM (x = 1 | z)PθLRM (x = 0 | z)dQ(θ),

and we plot these curves as a function of the distance z in Figure 6. Inferences across the
Bayes, Martingale, and PrO posteriors agrees on the qualitative nature of the marginal
22

Figure 6: Top row : the mean (solid line) and one standard error intervals (shaded area) of the
posterior marginal effects of the Bayes, Martingale, and PrO posteriors as a continuous function
of distance in the golf putting data. Bottom row : we investigate the posterior marginal effect under
PrO posterior at 2, 4, 6, 8, and 20 feet.

effect of distance: while the marginal effect of distance is negative and decreasing until
around 5–7 feet, it increases thereafter and monotonically in the range of 7–20 feet, and
rises close to a zero marginal effect. This suggests that at the range of 5–7 feet, every
professional golfer will opt to put, and that longer puts are generally more difficult. As the
distance to the hole increases, only golfers very proficient at putting over long distances
opt to take the shot, so that distance modulates a positive marginal effect on success.
While all posteriors agree on the shape of this curve, the accompanying uncertainty
differs substantively. Unlike for the Bayes and Martingale posteriors, the marginal effects
obtained from the PrO posterior at each distance are rich multimodal distributions, and
allow a more fine-grained model criticism. More precisely, they show that while posterior
uncertainty of the marginal effect is unimodal for very short and very long distances, it
23

bifurcates into a bimodal distribution for middle distances, which once again reaffirms
our previous observations: there are two relevant sub-groups in the data set, and middle
distances are the most informative to discriminate between them.
We note that this ease at which PrO posteriors can be used for model criticism has led
previous authors to speculate that one may be able to use related methods as a diagnostic
tool for model misspecification (see Lai and Yao, 2024; Chazal et al., 2025). While this
has previously been argued on the basis of heuristics, our findings in Section 3 provide the
statistical tools required for making these ideas more rigorous.

4.2.2

Bayesian Mixture Models

The above example raises an immediate question: given that the PrO posteriors seems to
indicate the presence of a group structure in the model, should we think of PrO posteriors
as mixture models? In fact, since the PrO posterior objective (2) directly targets the
R
marginalised predictive Pθ dQ(θ)—an object which we might call a mixture—how are the
aims of PrO posterior inference different from those of mixture modelling?
To answer this, consider the Bayesian mixture model given by
Pθ(1:M ) ,ω(1:M ) (x | z) =

M
X

ω (m) · PθLRM
(m) (x | z),

m=1

where the vector ω (1:M ) is non-negative and sums to one. One of the key practical challenges
in Bayesian mixture modelling consists in choosing priors on M and the mixture weights
ω (1:M ) . This is a key difference: PrO posteriors make no attempt at modelling mixtures
over PθLRM , and thus require no such priors. Instead, their priors are formulated with respect
to the typically more interpretable parameters of the base model PθLRM . Thus, while the
PrO posterior Qn is a predictively oriented mixing measure over the base model PθLRM ,
this mixing measure itself requires neither a statistical model nor a prior.
24

This is a sharp contrast to mixture models: as their name implies, they explicitly
model the mixture over PθLRM . This changes the parameter of interest: relative to the
simple logistic model in (6), a mixture model with M components inflates the number of
parameters by a factor of M . Though the resulting mixture Pθ(1:M ) , ω(1:M ) is more flexible
than PθLRM , it is also less parsimonious, and thus more difficult to interpret. In fact, mixture
models are usually used as density estimators, with parameters in each component being
synthetic artifacts without inherent meaning, so that Pθ(1:M ) , ω(1:M ) = Pθρ(1:M ) , ωρ(1:M ) for any
permutation ρ.
The above reveals several important practical differences between PrO posteriors and
Bayesian mixture models: the latter abide by orthodox Bayesian modelling, which comes
at the price of having to model the mixture and changing the parameter of interest. In
contrast, PrO posteriors continue to draw inferences with respect to a simpler and more
interpretable parameter. This allows for conclusions, summaries, and model criticisms that
lack clear counterparts in mixture models. For instance, since

log

PθLRM (x = 1 | z)
PθLRM (x = 0 | z)


= θ1 + θ2 z,

the parameter θ2 is directly interpretable as the linear effect of distance on the log-odds of
a successful put. The PrO posterior uncertainty which indicates two sub-groups of golfers
will therefore map directly onto the log-odds of the inferred model. We illustrate this phenomenon in Figure 7, which shows that for larger put distances, the skill differences between
these two groups become more pronounced (as measured in log odds). Mixture models
would not admit this visualisation: they make it impossible to express (θ(1:M ) , ω (1:M ) ) in
terms of their linear contributions to the log-odds of the underlying model Pθ(1:M ) , ω(1:M ) .

25

Figure 7: The distribution of PrO posterior log-odds for the golf putting data. The black dots
represent the posterior mean at those distances, and the solid line represents the posterior mean as
a continuous function of distance.

5

Illustrations

We supplement the discussion of the previous section by illustrating the promise of PrO
posteriors on three statistical problems. In Section 5.1, we highlight the implications of
convex recovery in a binary classification problem. Moving past independently sampled
data, the remaining examples illustrate that PrO posteriors outperform Gibbs posteriors
even when the theory’s assumptions are violated. In this vein, Section 5.2 focuses on predicting temporally dependent water flows of Stansted Brook in England, while Section 5.3
investigates the impact of using different scoring rules in a graphical model for spatially
dependent house prices in Boston.

5.1

Binary classification

To strengthen intuitions about the predictive benefits conferred by PrO posteriors, we
construct a synthetic data set in which a generalised linear model with logistic link function
allows for convex recovery as set out in Definition 2. Labels yi are assigned deterministically
(0)

(1)

as a function of the covariate vector (xi , xi ) which is sampled uniformly on [−2, 2]2 .

26

(0)

(1)

When the covariate vector falls into the top-left quadrant of [−2, 2]2 (so that xi < 0, xi >
(0)

(i)

0), yi = 0. In contrast, the bottom-left quadrant (for which xi > 0, xi < 0) yields yi = 1,
while labels in the remaining two quadrants are sampled as yi ∼ Ber(0.5).
We generate n = 1, 000 observations from this model and compute both the corresponding Bayes posterior and the PrO posterior based on the logarithmic scoring rule. We
compare their posterior predictive distributions in Figure 8, and conclude that Bayesian
inference produces a subpar decision boundary which leads to an overconfident misinterpretation about the data-generating process in the top-right and bottom-left quadrants. In
contrast, the PrO posterior identifies the correct decision boundary, and recovers a predictive distribution PQn for which KL(P0 ∥PQn ) is close to zero. This mirrors the predictions
of Theorems 1, and is a consequence of the fact that the PrO posterior predictive allows
for convex recovery of the exact decision boundary. Figure 9 further illustrates this by
probing the effect of n, and confirms that the theory derived is practically relevant even
for relatively small data set sizes.

5.2

River flow data

Throughout, our theoretical developments have used the assumption of independently sampled data. In practice however, prediction is often most interesting for sequentially or
spatially dependent data. While the theoretical development provided in the current paper cannot account for this, the following example shows that PrO posteriors continue to
function as expected in temporally dependent data (see also Shen et al., 2025).
Here, we focus on predicting the gauged daily flow of Stansted Brook north of London
using measurements of the UK’s Environment Agency. We model the flow using an autoregressive model of order seven with an intercept term, and compare the inferences obtained

27

Figure 8: Top row: Bayes and PrO posterior predictive distributions overlaid with the raw data.
Bottom row: Decision boundaries induced by individual draws from the posterior predictives. While
the Bayes posterior concentrates onto a single decision boundary, the PrO posterior is multimodal.

Figure 9: Constructing Bayes and PrO posteriors using n observations, we plot their negative log
likelihood (NLL) on test data, with standard error intervals obtained from 20 replications.

28

from a Gibbs posterior and a PrO posterior using the squared MMD. With this set-up, we
fit the model using data from March to November 2002, and use it to obtain one-step-ahead
predictions over the course of the transition from the exceptionally wet winter of 2002/2003
into the country’s driest February—October period since 1921 (Marsh, 2004). This abrupt
shift from heavy rain in January to the dry and warm conditions from February onwards
produced severe though short-lived hydrological stress, and offers an interesting regime for
testing the adaptivity of the PrO posterior. For further details, see Appendix D.6.
The results of our experiments are summarised in Figure 10. Here, we show the onestep-ahead predictive means over the period of November 2002 to March 2003 in the left
column. We find that the richer parameter uncertainty conferred by the PrO posterior is
able to handle the variability in the data more easily than the Gibbs posterior. This is also
evident from the right column of the Figure, which charts the cumulative performance of the
leave-one-out predictions. In summary, despite violating the assumption of independently
sampled data, we can recover the clear benefits of PrO posteriors. This suggests that the
independence assumptions imposed in our work are not required to justify using the PrO
posterior in practice.

5.3

Boston housing data

Strengthening the observations made in our previous experiment, we now demonstrate
that PrO posteriors continue to function reliably in spatial settings by modelling the
median house price across n = 506 different census tracts in Boston in the 1970s and
1980s. These data were originally collected by Harrison and Rubinfeld (1978), and are
summarised graphically in the left-most panel of Figure 11. Here, census tracts i and j are
displayed as nodes in an undirected graph with adjacency matrix Ω whose entry at (i, j) is

29

Figure 10: River flow data. In the left column we show the water flow (log scaled) in the winter
leading up to the drought of 2003 along with the mean of the Gibbs and PrO predictive distributions
respectively. In the right column we show the one-step-ahead cumulative mean predictive metrics.

given by ωi,j = 0 unless the tracts i and j share at least one vertex, in which case ωi,j = 1.
Median house values are then modelled as the conditional auto-regression
!
yi | y1 , . . . yi−1 , yi+1 , . . . yn ∼ N θ

X

ω̃i,j yj , σ 2

,

j̸=i

where ω̃i,j denote the rescaled ωi,j so that

P

j̸=i ω̃i,j = 1 for all i and where σ

2

> 0 is a fixed

constant which we estimate from data (for a more detailed explanation, see Appendix D.3).
From this model, we construct two Gibbs and PrO posteriors for θ using the squared MMD
and log score respectively; see Appendix D.8 for further details.
Importantly, the underlying data distribution is bimodal, and has its primary mode at
around $20, 000 and a second smaller mode at $50, 000 (see Appendix D.8), with the second
mode is due to censoring values exceeding $50, 000 (Gilley and Pace, 1996). In other words,
the data set has two sub-groups: tracts with median prices close to $20, 000, and tracts
30

with median prices are more than twice that value. Our results in Figure 11 show the effect
on inference: while the Gibbs posterior fails to capture this hidden structure in the data,
the PrO posterior transfers it to the parameter space. Its bi-modality reflects the fact
that while there is a small group of census tracts with very high house prices surrounded
by cheaper areas, a much larger group will be surrounded by similarly priced tracts. While
the former group is accounted for through a smaller mode around θ ∈ [1.2, 1.4], the latter
is captured by the larger mode around θ ∈ [0.8, 1.0]. As the rightmost panel of Figure 11
confirms, this is not only a richer description of parameter uncertainty, but also leads
to better predictive performance. Confirming our earlier observation that the choice of
scoring rule seems to matter less for PrO posteriors, these results and interpretations are
qualitatively the same whether one uses the squared MMD or the logarithmic scoring rule.

6

Computation via Wasserstein Gradient Flows

The tools for the computation of PrO posteriors are limited. In fact, most previous
work targeting related objects did not even consider the possibility of exact computation,
and instead focused on approximating Qn with a parameterised variational family (see
Jankowiak et al., 2020a,b; Masegosa, 2020; Morningstar et al., 2022; Lai and Yao, 2024).
The only pre-existing work directly targeting exact computation is Shen et al. (2025), which
built on the ideas in Wild et al. (2023) and the mean-field Langevin algorithm of Del Moral
(2013) to derive an asymptotically exact sampler for the special case where the scoring rule
is the squared MMD. Here, we explain how this can be generalised to any PrO posterior.
We may rewrite the objective minimised in (2) as
n

λn X
S (PQ , xi ) −
L (Q) =
n i=1

Z

Z
log dΠ(θ) dQ(θ) +

31

log dQ(θ) dQ(θ).

(7)

Figure 11: Top left: illustration of the Boston housing data set. Nodes correspond to census tracts,
and shade represents price level. Census tracts are connected by edges if they are spatially adjacent.
Middle columns: Gibbs and PrO parameter posteriors under the MMD score (top row) and the
log score (bottom row). Right column: mean and standard error of the leave-one-node-out negative
log likelihood (lower is better).

For functionals like this, the Wasserstein gradient flow (WGF) can be used to construct
a gradient descent scheme via interacting particle systems derived from a McKean-Vlasov
process. If the Wasserstein gradient of n1

Pn

i=1 S (PQ , xi ) is given by W(Q), the Wasserstein

gradient of L (Q) with respect to Q evaluated at ϑ ∈ Θ is
∇W L (Q)[ϑ] = λn W(Q)[ϑ] − ∇ϑ log dΠ(ϑ) + ∇ϑ log dQ(ϑ).
The WGF {Qt }t>0 defined by this gradient is the continuous-time process which evolves
in the direction of steepest descent relative to the convex functional Q 7→ L (Q) given by
∇W L (Q). As L (Q) is convex, and as the minimiser of L (Q) is the PrO posterior, the
WGF acts as a continuously-valued version of gradient descent on probability measures, so
32

that Qt converges to the PrO posterior as t → ∞ under mild conditions.
To implement this gradient descent algorithm numerically, we resort to the WGF’s
mean-field representation, which gives rise to the stochastic differential equation (SDE)
dϑt = − {λn W(Qt )[ϑt ] − ∇ϑ log dΠ(ϑt )} dt +

√

2dBt ,

for ϑt ∼ Qt ,

and where the Brownian motion Bt appears as the WGF of entropy corresponds to the
heat equation (Jordan et al., 1998). Unfortunately, the above SDE still depends on the
unknown measure Qt , which makes exact forward simulation impossible. To remedy this,
(j)

we use the approximations Qt (θ) ≈ p1

Pp

, where δx denotes the Dirac measure
ℓ=1,ℓ̸=j δϑ(ℓ)
t

(j)

at x, and ϑt for j = 1, 2, . . . p are a set of p interacting particles. This finally results in a
system of p interacting particles whose evolution is governed by the p equations
(j)
dϑt = −

(j)

where {Bt

n
o
√
(j)
(j)
(j)
(j)
W(Qt )[ϑt ] − ∇ϑ log dΠ(ϑt ) dt + 2dBt ,

j = 1, 2 . . . p,

: j = 1, 2, . . . p} denotes p independent Brownian motions. To obtain a high-

fidelity approximation of the PrO posterior from this particle system, one discretises it into
time steps t1 , t2 , . . . , and evolves it for a sufficiently long time. Afterwards, one averages
over all time steps past an initial burn-in τ and approximates the PrO posterior as
X
1
b i]
Q[t
Qn ≈
|{ti : ti > τ }| t >τ
i

for

p
1X
b
Q[ti ] =
δ (j) .
p j=1 ϑti

Here, the notation highlights that this approximation should be thought of as an average
b
of |{ti : ti > τ }| measures Q[t],
each of which would recover Qn exactly if there were no
discretisation error and both p → ∞ and t → ∞ (see e.g. Lemma 6 in Appendix E of
Wild et al., 2023). We showcase this algorithm for the squared MMD and the logarithmic
scoring rule in Appendix E.1, and elaborate on practical considerations in Appendix E.2.

33

7

Discussion

In this paper, we have advocated for a new statistical paradigm that defines epistemic
uncertainty as a function of predictive capability. This led to PrO posteriors, which predictively dominate alternative methods for parameter inference like Gibbs posteriors and
deliver interpretable and practically meaningful uncertainty quantification. We argued that
PrO posteriors bridge the two main statistical traditions identified by Breiman (2001), and
asserted that they lead to a version of epistemic uncertainty that is more expansive, adapts
to model misspecification, and can avoid posterior collapse whenever this improves predictive performance. Throughout, we rigorously established these benefits and illustrated
their practical importance on several instructive examples.
While we have presented evidence which advocates the adoption of PrO posteriors
for inference and uncertainty quantification, much remains to be done. Perhaps the most
pressing concern is the improvement of the available strategies for computation: sampling
schemes obtained from interacting particle systems require further work before they can become attractive off-the-shelf algorithmic framework. Most notably, naı̈ve implementations
are infeasible for high-dimensional problems, generally computationally demanding, and
require careful tuning of several hyperparameters. However, since research on improving
such samplers has recently intensified (see Suzuki et al., 2023; Fu and Wilson, 2023; Liu
et al., 2023; Chazal et al., 2025), we are hopeful that advances in the area will facilitate
purpose-built algorithms which overcome these limitations.
Beyond computation, there are several outstanding theoretical questions that our current development has not explored yet. The most obvious of these concerns the choice
of scoring rule. While our experiments and theory suggest that this choice is relatively
unimportant in the case of convex recovery, we expect there to be important qualitative

34

differences in behaviour for certain forms of non-trivial misspecification. For example, with
Huber-contaminated data-generating processes of the form P0 = (1 − ε)PQ∗ + ε · c for some
Q∗ ∈ P(Θ) and some contamination c ∈ P(X ), existing research on parametric inference
(see e.g. Chérief-Abdellatif and Alquier, 2020, 2022; Dellaporta et al., 2022; Alquier et al.,
2023; Alquier and Gerber, 2024) would indicate that PrO posteriors based on outlierrobust scoring rules like the squared maximum mean discrepancy should recover posteriors
very similar to Q∗ , while logarithmic scoring rules would behave completely differently.
A second foundational question concerns the degree to which data can be allowed to be
dependent: while our theory was derived under the assumption of independent data, our
experiments seemed to suggest that the predictive benefits of PrO posteriors extend beyond this setting. Lastly, while it is clear that PrO posteriors are incoherent belief updates
in the sense of Bissiri et al. (2016), it is worth investigating whether they can be re-cast as
quasi-coherent updates on an extended space.
In the bigger picture, PrO posteriors have interesting connections to a number of other
approaches grounded in frequentist statistics, and studying their intersection may result in
mutually beneficial insights. For instance, the PrO posterior can be seen as a regularised
frequentist estimate for the mixing measure in a nonparametric mixture model: most obviously, in the special case of the logarithmic scoring rule and when the prior regularisation
term is dropped, (2) recovers nonparametric maximum likelihood exactly. Importantly,
dropping the KL-term causes several practical issues that are absent from PrO posteriors, including computational difficulties due to non-identifiability (see e.g. Laird, 1978).
Further, the corresponding measure-valued nonparametric maximum likelihood estimator
generally cannot be interpreted as a tool for probabilistic uncertainty quantification—not
only for conceptual reasons, but also because it is generally not unique and discrete; see

35

Lindsay (1995, Theorem 21 in Chapter 5) and Jordan-Squire (2015).
Similarly, our work has clear parallels with the efforts of statistical learning theory to
develop optimal aggregation procedures for predictors. For example, in his Saint-Flour
lectures, Nemirovski (2000) introduces convex aggregation as the statistical task of finding
the optimal convex combination of predictors. Intriguingly, for some model classes such
as bounded regression with a finite number of candidates, the minimax-optimal convex
aggregation procedure with respect to the squared risk can be shown to coincide precisely
with (2) so long as the KL-regularisation term is removed (see, e.g., Lecué, 2013; Yang and
Dunson, 2014). Though we have made no attempt at formalising these suspicions, this
also suggests that PrO posteriors may be close to minimax-optimal convex aggregation
procedures in certain problem classes.

Acknowledgements
This manuscript has benefited tremendously from interactions with many brilliant colleagues. Most notably, we feel deep gratitude towards Prof. Chris Oates for many conversations and insightful remarks. Further, we would like to thank Dr. Louis Sharrock
and Dr. Sam Power for their help with the computational aspects of this paper. We are
also grateful for correspondence with Prof. Pierre Alquier that pointed to the connection
with PAC-Bayesian majority voting. Additionally, we owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to several colleagues who took time to read an earlier version of this manuscript and
gave incredibly insightful comments—often pages and pages of them!—that significantly
improved the paper; most notably Prof. David Dunson, Prof. Jeff Miller, Prof. Aki Vehtari, Prof. Pierre Jacob, Dr. Andres Masegosa, Dr. Edwin Fong, Dr. Jack Jewson,
and Dr. Takuo Matsubara. DTF acknowledges funding from the Australian Research

36

Council (DE200101070, DP200101414), YM from the Heilbronn Institute for Mathematical Research (EP/V521917/1), and JK was supported through the UK’s Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) via EP/W005859/1. The authors acknowledge the use of the UCL Myriad High Performance Computing Facility (Myriad@UCL),
and associated support services, in the completion of this work. Data were provided by the
UK National River Flow Archive.

References
Aitchison, J. (1975). Goodness of prediction fit. Biometrika 62(3), 547–554. 2, 6, 7
Alquier, P. (2024). User-friendly introduction to PAC-Bayes bounds. Foundations and Trends® in Machine
Learning 17(2), 174–303. 2, 44
Alquier, P., B.-E. Chérief-Abdellatif, A. Derumigny, and J.-D. Fermanian (2023). Estimation of copulas
via maximum mean discrepancy. Journal of the American Statistical Association 118(543), 1997–2012.
35
Alquier, P. and M. Gerber (2024, February). Universal robust regression via maximum mean discrepancy.
Biometrika 111(1), 71–92. Publisher: Oxford University Press (OUP). 35, 66
Alquier, P., J. Ridgway, and N. Chopin (2016). On the properties of variational approximations of Gibbs
posteriors. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 17(1), 8374–8414. 49
Altamirano, M., F.-X. Briol, and J. Knoblauch (2023a). Robust and conjugate Gaussian process regression.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00463. 6, 9
Altamirano, M., F.-X. Briol, and J. Knoblauch (2023b). Robust and scalable Bayesian online changepoint
detection. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 6, 9
Audibert, J.-Y. (2004). Pac-bayesian statistical learning theory. These de doctorat de l’Université Paris 6,
29. 8
Banerjee, S., K. Balasubramanian, and P. Ghosal (2025). Improved finite-particle convergence rates for
stein variational gradient descent. 73
Berti, P., E. Dreassi, L. Pratelli, and P. Rigo (2021). A class of models for Bayesian predictive inference.
Bernoulli 27(1), 702–726. 18
Bissiri, P. G., C. C. Holmes, and S. G. Walker (2016). A general framework for updating belief distributions.
J. Royal Statist. Society Series B 78(5), 1103–1130. 2, 7, 35
Breiman, L. (2001, August). Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures (with comments and a rejoinder by
the author). Statistical Science 16(3). 4, 17, 34
Bürkner, P.-C., J. Gabry, and A. Vehtari (2020, September). Approximate leave-future-out cross-validation
for Bayesian time series models. Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation 90(14), 2499–2523.
70
Chazal, C., H. Kanagawa, Z. Shen, A. Korba, and C. J. Oates (2025, September). A Computable Measure
of Suboptimality for Entropy-Regularised Variational Objectives. arXiv:2509.10393 [stat]. 24, 34, 73

37

Chérief-Abdellatif, B.-E. and P. Alquier (2020). MMD-Bayes: Robust Bayesian estimation via maximum
mean discrepancy. In Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference, pp. 1–21. PMLR.
6, 35
Chérief-Abdellatif, B.-E. and P. Alquier (2022). Finite sample properties of parametric mmd estimation:
robustness to misspecification and dependence. Bernoulli 28(1), 181–213. 35
Del Moral, P. (2013). Mean field simulation for monte carlo integration. Monographs on Statistics and
Applied Probability 126(26), 6. 31
Dellaporta, C., J. Knoblauch, T. Damoulas, and F.-X. Briol (2022). Robust Bayesian inference for
simulator-based models via the MMD posterior bootstrap. In International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 943–970. PMLR. 35
Duran-Martin, G., M. Altamirano, A. Shestopaloff, L. Sánchez-Betancourt, J. Knoblauch, M. Jones, F.X. Briol, and K. P. Murphy (2024). Outlier-robust kalman filtering through generalised bayes. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12138–12171. PMLR. 6, 9
Fong, E., C. Holmes, and S. G. Walker (2023). Martingale posterior distributions. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology 85(5), 1357–1391. 2, 18, 19, 21, 22
Fortini, S. and S. Petrone (2020). Quasi-Bayes Properties of a Procedure for Sequential Learning in Mixture
Models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology 82(4), 1087–1114. 18
Fortini, S. and S. Petrone (2023). Prediction-based uncertainty quantification for exchangeable sequences. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences 381(2247), 20220142. 18
Fortini, S. and S. Petrone (2025). Exchangeability, prediction and predictive modeling in Bayesian statistics.
Statistical Science 40(1), 40–67. 18
Frazier, D. T., J. Knoblauch, J. Jewson, and C. Drovandi (2025). Exact sampling of gibbs measures with
estimated losses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15649. 6
Fu, Q. and A. C. Wilson (2023). Mean-field underdamped langevin dynamics and its spacetime discretization. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning. 34
Garreau, D., W. Jitkrittum, and M. Kanagawa (2018, October). Large sample analysis of the median
heuristic. arXiv:1707.07269 [math]. 67
Gelman, A. and D. Nolan (2002, September).
Statistics 24(3), 93–95. Publisher: Wiley. 21

A Probability Model for Golf Putting.

Teaching

Germain, P., A. Lacasse, F. Laviolette, M. Marchand, and J.-F. Roy (2015). Risk bounds for the majority
vote: From a pac-bayesian analysis to a learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.08329. 8
Ghosal, S., J. K. Ghosh, and A. W. van der Vaart (2000). Convergence rates of posterior distributions.
Ann. Statist. 28(2), 500–531. 43
Ghosal, S. and A. W. Van Der Vaart (2001). Entropies and rates of convergence for maximum likelihood
and bayes estimation for mixtures of normal densities. Annals of Statistics, 1233–1263. 14
Gilley, O. W. and R. Pace (1996, November). On the Harrison and Rubinfeld Data.
Environmental Economics and Management 31(3), 403–405. 30

Journal of

Giummolè, F., V. Mameli, E. Ruli, and L. Ventura (2019, September). Objective Bayesian inference with
proper scoring rules. TEST 28(3), 728–755. 6

38

Gneiting, T., F. Balabdaoui, and A. E. Raftery (2007). Probabilistic forecasts, calibration and sharpness.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 69(2), 243–268. 14, 51
Gneiting, T. and A. E. Raftery (2007). Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation. Journal
of the American statistical Association 102(477), 359–378. 5
Grünwald, P. and T. van Ommen (2017). Inconsistency of bayesian inference for misspecified linear models,
and a proposal for repairing it. Bayesian Analysis 12(4), 1069–1103. 6, 12, 44
Harrison, D. and D. L. Rubinfeld (1978, March). Hedonic housing prices and the demand for clean air.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 5(1), 81–102. 29
Hauptvogel, N. and C. Igel (2024). On uniform, bayesian, and pac-bayesian deep ensembles. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.05469. 8
Horst, A. M., A. P. Hill, and K. B. Gorman (2020). palmerpenguins: Palmer Archipelago (Antarctica)
penguin data. R package version 0.1.0. 18
Hu, K., Z. Ren, D. Siska, and L. Szpruch (2020, December). Mean-Field Langevin Dynamics and Energy
Landscape of Neural Networks. arXiv:1905.07769 [math]. 55
Jankowiak, M., G. Pleiss, and J. Gardner (2020a). Deep sigma point processes. In Proceedings of the 36th
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. 8, 31
Jankowiak, M., G. Pleiss, and J. Gardner (2020b). Parametric Gaussian process regressors. In Proceedings
of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning. 8, 31
Jewson, J., J. Q. Smith, and C. Holmes (2018). Principles of Bayesian inference using general divergence
criteria. Entropy 20(6), 442. 6
Jiang, W. and M. A. Tanner (2008, October). Gibbs posterior for variable selection in high-dimensional
classification and data mining. The Annals of Statistics 36(5). 2, 6
Jordan, R., D. Kinderlehrer, and F. Otto (1998). The variational formulation of the fokker–planck equation.
SIAM journal on mathematical analysis 29(1), 1–17. 33
Jordan-Squire, C. (2015). Convex Optimization over Probability Measures. Ph. D. thesis, University of
Washington. 36
Knoblauch, J., J. Jewson, and T. Damoulas (2022). An optimization-centric view on Bayes’ rule: Reviewing
and generalizing variational inference. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 23(1), 5789–5897. 2,
7
Knoblauch, J., J. E. Jewson, and T. Damoulas (2018). Doubly robust Bayesian inference for non-stationary
streaming data with beta-divergences. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31. 6
Lacasse, A., F. Laviolette, M. Marchand, P. Germain, and N. Usunier (2006). Pac-bayes bounds for the risk
of the majority vote and the variance of the gibbs classifier. Advances in Neural information processing
systems 19. 8
Lai, J. and Y. Yao (2024). Predictive variational inference: Learn the predictively optimal posterior
distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14843. 8, 24, 31
Laird, N. (1978). Nonparametric maximum likelihood estimation of a mixing distribution. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 73(364), 805–811. 35
Laplante, W., M. Altamirano, A. Duncan, J. Knoblauch, and F.-X. Briol (2025). Robust and conjugate
spatio-temporal gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02450. 6, 9

39

Laviolette, F., M. Marchand, and J.-F. Roy (2011). From pac-bayes bounds to quadratic programs for
majority votes. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5–59. 8
Laviolette, F., E. Morvant, L. Ralaivola, and J.-F. Roy (2017). Risk upper bounds for general ensemble
methods with an application to multiclass classification. Neurocomputing 219, 15–25. 8
Lecué, G. (2013). Empirical risk minimization is optimal for the convex aggregation problem. Bernoulli.
36
Lindsay, B. G. (1995). Mixture Models: Theory, Geometry, and Applications. Institute of Mathematical
Statistics. 36
Liu, L., M. B. Majka, and L. Szpruch (2023). Polyak–lojasiewicz inequality on the space of measures and
convergence of mean-field birth-death processes. Applied Mathematics & Optimization 87(3), 48. 34
Liu, Q., M. A. Fisher, Z. Shen, K. Tant, X. Zhao, A. Curtis, and C. J. Oates (2025, December). Detecting
Model Misspecification in Bayesian Inverse Problems via Variational Gradient Descent. arXiv:2512.01667
[stat]. 56
Lorenzen, S. S., C. Igel, and Y. Seldin (2019). On pac-bayesian bounds for random forests. Machine
Learning 108(8), 1503–1522. 8
Lyddon, S., C. Holmes, and S. Walker (2019). General Bayesian updating and the loss-likelihood bootstrap.
Biometrika 106(2), 465–478. 22
Marsh, T. J. (2004, August). The UK drought of 2003: A hydrological review. Weather 59(8), 224–230.
29
Martin, R. and N. Syring (2022). Direct Gibbs posterior inference on risk minimizers: Construction,
concentration, and calibration. In Handbook of Statistics, Volume 47, pp. 1–41. Elsevier. 2, 6
Marusic, J., M. A. Medina, and C. Rush (2025). A theoretical framework for m-posteriors: frequentist
guarantees and robustness properties. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01358. 9
Masegosa, A. (2020). Learning under model misspecification: Applications to variational and ensemble
methods. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, 5479–5491. 8, 31
Masegosa, A., S. Lorenzen, C. Igel, and Y. Seldin (2020). Second order pac-bayesian bounds for the
weighted majority vote. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, 5263–5273. 8
Matsubara, T., J. Knoblauch, F.-X. Briol, and C. J. Oates (2022). Robust generalised Bayesian inference for
intractable likelihoods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology 84(3),
997–1022. 6, 9
Matsubara, T., J. Knoblauch, F.-X. Briol, and C. J. Oates (2023). Generalised Bayesian inference for
discrete intractable likelihood. Journal of the American Statistical Association (just-accepted), 1–21. 6,
9
McLatchie, Y., E. Fong, D. T. Frazier, and J. Knoblauch (2025, July). Predictive performance of power
posteriors. Biometrika 112(3), asaf034. 2, 6, 22
Miller, J. W. and D. B. Dunson (2019). Robust bayesian inference via coarsening. Journal of the American
Statistical Association. 3
Morningstar, W. R., A. Alemi, and J. V. Dillon (2022). Pacm-bayes: Narrowing the empirical risk gap in
the misspecified bayesian regime. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
pp. 8270–8298. PMLR. 8, 31

40

Nemirovski, A. (2000). Topics in non-parametric statistics. Ecole d’Eté de Probabilités de Saint-Flour 28,
85. 36
Ortega, L. A., R. Cabañas, and A. Masegosa (2022). Diversity and generalization in neural network
ensembles. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 11720–11743. PMLR.
8
Pedregosa, F., G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,
R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12,
2825–2830. 64
Pitas, K., H. A. Bourrous, and J. Arbel (2025). u-ensembles: Improved diversity in the small data regime
using unlabeled data. In 7th Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference {\textendash}
Proceedings Track. 8
Robert, C. P. et al. (2007). The Bayesian choice: from decision-theoretic foundations to computational
implementation, Volume 2. Springer. 1
Roberts, G. O. and J. S. Rosenthal (1998). Optimal scaling of discrete approximations to langevin diffusions.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 60(1), 255–268. 72
Roberts, G. O. and R. L. Tweedie (1996). Exponential convergence of Langevin distributions and their
discrete approximations. Bernoulli 2(4), 341 – 363. 72
Rubin, D. B. (1981). The bayesian bootstrap. The annals of statistics, 130–134. 22
Schmon, S. M., P. W. Cannon, and J. Knoblauch (2020). Generalized posteriors in approximate bayesian
computation. In Third Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference. 6
Sharrock, L. and C. Nemeth (2025, October). Tuning-Free Sampling via Optimization on the Space of
Probability Measures. arXiv:2510.25315 [stat]. 69, 72
Shen, Z., J. Knoblauch, S. Power, and C. J. Oates (2025). Prediction-centric uncertainty quantification via
mmd. In The 28th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. 8, 27, 31, 56, 71
Sheth, R. and R. Khardon (2020). Pseudo-Bayesian learning via direct loss minimization with applications
to sparse Gaussian process models. In Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Advances in Approximate
Bayesian Inference. 8
Sivula, T., M. Magnusson, A. A. Matamoros, and A. Vehtari (2025, January). Uncertainty in Bayesian
Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation Based Model Comparison. Bayesian Analysis -1(-1). 68
Suzuki, T., D. Wu, and A. Nitanda (2023). Convergence of mean-field langevin dynamics: time-space
discretization, stochastic gradient, and variance reduction. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 36, 15545–15577. 34
Syring, N. and R. Martin (2019). Calibrating general posterior credible regions. Biometrika 106(2), 479–
486. 2, 3, 6
Theisen, R., H. Kim, Y. Yang, L. Hodgkinson, and M. W. Mahoney (2024). When are ensembles really
effective? Advances in neural information processing systems 36, 15015–15026. 8
van der Vaart, A. W. (1998). Asymptotic statistics, Volume 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2
Viallard, P., P. Germain, A. Habrard, and E. Morvant (2021). Self-bounding majority vote learning
algorithms by the direct minimization of a tight pac-bayesian c-bound. In Joint European Conference
on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 167–183. Springer. 8

41

Vignault, L.-P., A. Durand, and P. Germain (2023). Erratum: Risk bounds for the majority vote: From a
pac-bayesian analysis to a learning algorithm. Journal of Machine Learning Research 24(294), 1–13. 8
Wang, D. and Q. Liu (2019). Nonlinear stein variational gradient descent for learning diversified mixture
models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6576–6585. PMLR. 8
Wei, Y., R. Sheth, and R. Khardon (2021). Direct loss minimization for sparse gaussian processes. In
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2566–2574. PMLR. 8
Wild, V. D., S. Ghalebikesabi, D. Sejdinovic, and J. Knoblauch (2023). A rigorous link between deep
ensembles and (variational) bayesian methods. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36,
39782–39811. 31, 33
Wu, Y.-S., A. Masegosa, S. Lorenzen, C. Igel, and Y. Seldin (2021). Chebyshev-cantelli pac-bayes-bennett
inequality for the weighted majority vote. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34,
12625–12636. 8
Wu, Y.-S. and Y. Seldin (2022). Split-kl and pac-bayes-split-kl inequalities for ternary random variables.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 11369–11381. 8
Yang, Y. and D. B. Dunson (2014, March). Minimax Optimal Bayesian Aggregation. arXiv:1403.1345
[math]. 36
Zellner, A. (1988, November). Optimal information processing and Bayes’s theorem. The American
Statistician 42(4), 278. 2
Zhang, T. (2006, October). From ε-entropy to KL-entropy: Analysis of minimum information complexity
density estimation. The Annals of Statistics 34(5). 2, 6

8

Detailed Theoretical Developments

Herein, we fully develop and explain the results summarised in Theorem 1, and discuss
some additional results left out from the main paper. Throughout all results, we take
p
λn = n1/2 / kC 2 log(n)2 for some universal constant C which depends on the particular
assumptions imposed, and where we set k = 1 when Assumption 2 is satisfied.

8.1

A Preliminary Result

Recall that DS represents the divergence associated with the scoring rule S(·, x), where
DS (P, P0 ) = S(P, P0 ) − S(P0 , P0 ), and S(P, P0 ) = EX∼P0 [S(P, X)].
Regardless of the fact that that different scores can require slightly different regularity
conditions, PrO posteriors deliver similar theoretical results in both cases.
42

Lemma 1. Assumption 1 is satisfied. If Assumption 2 or Assumption 2′ holds, then


KL(Q∥Π)
E [DS (PQn , P0 )] ≤ inf
DS (PQ , P0 ) +
+ νn .
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
for νn as defined in (5).
Lemma 1 delivers a meaningful preliminary bound on the predictive performance of
PrO posteriors. Further, this result applies to PrO posterior based on any predictive
score that satisfies our Assumptions.

8.2

Generic Misspecification

Under mild regularity conditions, Gibbs posteriors based on scoring rules concentrate towards θ⋆ := argminθ∈Θ S(Pθ , P0 ), which defines the model that is closest to P0 in terms of
S. In fact, results like this only require existence of θ⋆ and mild conditions on the probability mass that Π has around θ⋆ . The next assumption provides such conditions, and is
sufficient for Gibbs posterior concentration to occur. In the remainder, we will use these
assumptions to compare the behaviour of Gibbs posteriors with that of PrO posteriors as
n increases.
Assumption 3. There exists θ⋆ = argminθ∈Θ S(Pθ , P0 ), and constants cS > 0 and dS > 0
and some r0 > 0 such that, for any r ≤ r0 , and Br := {θ ∈ Θ : DS (Pθ , P0 ) − DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) ≤ r},
Π (Br ) ≥ (r/cS )dS .
The above is slightly stronger than the classical prior mass condition of Ghosal et al.
(2000), insofar as the condition is essentially geared toward parametric models: while it
may not be satisfied outside of Euclidean spaces, it is mild and unrestrictive when Θ is a
Euclidean space. In fact, the above assumption is considered standard in the PAC-Bayes
literature, where interest traditionally is more focused on parametric models (see, e.g.,
43

Section 4.4 of Alquier, 2024); however, we note that this condition can be replaced with
the standard prior mass condition, in general rates, without meaningfully altering our main
results. Using Assumption 3, we obtain the first result comparing predictive performance
between PrO posteriors and Gibbs posteriors in the case where we allow for generic model
misspecification.
Theorem 2. Under Assumptions 1-3, E[DS (PQn , P0 ) − DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 )] ≲ νn . Furthermore,


E[DS PQ†n , P0 − DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 )] ≲ log(n)/n1/2 .
In words, Theorem 2 says that the PrO posteriors predictive performance is comparable
to that of the Gibbs posterior based on the same scoring rule. While this may be reassuring,
it does not show that the PrO posterior confers a clear advantage. The reason for this
is that Assumption 3 does not rule out the case where the predictively optimal average
Q⋆ ∈ arginf Q∈P(Θ) S(PQ , P0 ) is a point mass at θ⋆ = argminθ∈Θ DS (Pθ , P0 ), the scoreminimising value. In this case—which is unlikely to occur in sufficiently complex data
sets—Gibbs and PrO posteriors alike would allocate most of their probability mass around
θ⋆ as n → ∞, and would not produce meaningfully different predictive distributions.

8.3

Non-Trivial Misspecification

By excluding trivial forms of misspecification, we can obtain a clearer idea of the advantages PrO posteriors maintain over Bayes and Gibbs posteriors. Following the idea of
bad misspecification presented by Grünwald and van Ommen (2017), the more general notion of non-trivial misspecification in Definition 2 will ensure that averaging over MΘ is
predictively advantageous.
Assumption 4. There exists Q⋆ ∈ arg inf Q∈P(Θ) DS (PQ , P0 ), such that KL(Q⋆ ∥Π) < ∞

44

and DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) > DS (PQ⋆ , P0 ) . Further, the mapping θ 7→ Pθ is continuous and identifiable.
When the magnitude of misspecification is small, the Gibbs posterior is already highly
performant, so that the PrO posterior can only achieve a small amount (if at all) of predictive superiority. Non-trivial misspecification is therefore sufficient for the PrO posterior
to achieve predictive domination in any score.
Theorem 3. Under Assumptions 1-4 and for n large enough but finite, it holds that
E [DS (PQn , P0 )] < E[DS (PQ†n , P0 )], and E [DS (PQn , P0 ) − DS (PQ⋆ , P0 )] ≲ νn .
The above result constitutes part (NT) in Theorem 1. The result shows that under
suitable regularity conditions, PrO posteriors strictly dominate both Bayes posteriors and
Gibbs posteriors in terms of their predictive performance. Crucially, this is not an asymptotic result: it holds in expectation for finite samples. While the result shows the superior
predictive performance of PrO posteriors, it leaves several key questions unanswered: what
is the qualitative behaviour of PrO posteriors? Can we characterise the shape they take,
at least asymptotically? And how practically significant is the performance gap? Unfortunately, it is not possible to establish these properties in full generality: without further
assumptions on the nature of the misspecification, we could be arbitrarily close to being
in the trivially misspecified regime. In the next section, we further refine the nature of
misspecification we consider to deduce an answer to these questions.

8.4

Misspecification with Convex Recovery

From Definition 2, we recall that convex recovery implies the existence of some Q ∈ P(Θ)
for which PQ can recover the data-generating process P0 . Interestingly, the PrO posterior

45

recovers the truth so long as P0 is convexly recoverable as either a purely discrete or
continuous mixture.
Assumption 5. One of the following is satisfied.
(i) There exists Q⋆ ∈ P(Θ), with KL(Q⋆ ∥Π) < ∞, such that P0 =
(ii) For some J ∈ N, P0 =

R

Pθ dQ⋆ (θ).

PJ

J−1
J
⋆
are non-negative weights
j=1 ωj Pθj , where (ωj )j=1 ∈ ∆

summing to unity, and θj⋆ ∈ Θ. For Br,j = {θ : DS (Pθ , Pθj⋆ ) ≤ rj }, there are constants
cS , dS > 0 so that, for any r ≤ r0 , Π(Br,j ) ≥ (r/cS )dS for j = 1, 2, . . . , J.
Assumption 5 restricts the nature of the true model to be either a purely discrete
or continuous mixture with components Pθ . Assumption 5(i) requires that this mixture
is absolutely continuous with respect to the prior, via the condition KL(Q⋆ ∥Π) < ∞,
while Assumption 5(ii) is its discrete analogue, and is an extension of Assumption 3 to
J components. Similar to Assumption 3, Assumption 5(ii) requires that the prior should
place enough mass near each component of the discrete mixture representing the true data
generating process P0 .
Theorem 4. Under Assumptions 1-5, and for n sufficiently large but finite, E [DS (PQn , P0 )] <
E[DS (PQ†n , P0 )], and E [DS (PQn , P0 )] ≲ νn .
The above result constitutes part (CR) in Theorem 1, and shows that, up to logarithmic
factors, we recover the true data generating process P0 at the standard parametric rate of
n−1/2 when Assumption 2′ is satisfied; if Assumption 2 is satisfied, we recover P0 at the
slower of the rates rn and the standard parametric rate.

8.4.1

Correct Model Specification

Theorems 3 and 4 prove that the PrO posterior has superior predictive properties to Gibbs
and Bayes posteriors under model misspecification, but it is unclear what penalty we pay
46

when using the PrO posterior in the context of a well-specified model. The next result
shows that there is little to worry about.
Corollary 2. If Assumptions 1-2 and 5(ii) hold for J = 1 and θ1⋆ = θ⋆ , then E [DS (PQn , P0 )]−
E[DS (PQ†n , P0 )] ≲ νn .
The above result constitutes part (WS) in Theorem 1 and shows that there is little
evidence for a loss in predictive statistical efficiency when using PrO posteriors in the
well-specified regime: the worst case difference relative to Gibbs posteriors based on the
same scoring rule is bounded by a vanishing sequence of order νn , which is log(n)/n1/2 in
the case of Assumption 2′ and max{log(n)/n1/2 , rn } in the case of Assumption 2.
Since Gibbs posteriors concentrate onto the true parameter θ∗ in well-specified models,
Corollary 2 raises the question of whether or not PrO posteriors behave the same. Under
additional assumptions, we can demonstrate that this is indeed the case. For P, Q ∈ P(Θ),
let d1 (P, Q) denote a metric on the space of probability measures. Further, let d2 (P, Q) be
a symmetric discrepancy on P(X ). Here, d2 (P, Q) need not be a metric, but is assumed to
satisfy a weak triangle inequality.
Assumption 6. (i) The map θ 7→ Pθ is continuous and identifiable, and there exist
Q⋆ ∈ P(Θ) such that Q⋆ = argminQ∈P(Θ) DS (PQ , P0 ); (ii) there exists constant C, and
ε > 0 such that, for any Q, Q′ ∈ P(Θ), if d2 (PQ , PQ′ ) ≤ ε, then d1 (Q, Q′ ) ≤ Cd2 (PQ , PQ′ );
and (iii) for some α ≥ 1, d2 (PQ , PQ′ )α ≤ DS (PQ , PQ′ ).
Assumption 6 allows us to translate concentration in the PrO posterior predictive PQn
to concentration in the PrO posterior Qn defined on the parameter space. While part (i)
is standard, part (ii) gives a form of identifiability condition of the posterior. In particular,
it ensures that if two predictives PQ , PQ′ are close, then their underlying posteriors Q, Q′
must also be close. Without such an assumption, concentration in the predictive space,
47

PQ , would not necessarily translate into concentration over Q. Lastly, part (iii) is a type
of reverse Hölder continuity, that depends on the choice of score, distance, and the model
class MΘ . Its purpose is to relate the score-induced discrepancy measure to a more regular
measure of distance on the space of measures, which is needed to transfer convergence.
While it is difficult to establish these conditions in general, they can be shown to hold for
the squared MMD and the logarithmic scoring rule for several model classes of interest.
1/α

Corollary 3. If Assumptions 1-2, and 5-6 hold, then E[d1 (Qn , Q⋆ )] ≲ νn .
Under various choices of α, d1 , and d2 , Corollary 3 applies to both the squared MMD
(with α = 2 and d2 (P, Q) = MMD(P, Q)) and to the intractable exact logarithmic scoring
rule (with α = 2 and d2 (P, Q) = TV(P, Q)), which satisfy Assumption 6 part (iii). For
the special case of regular parametric models, the local equivalence between d2 (Pθ , Pθ⋆ )
and the Euclidean distance ∥θ − θ⋆ ∥2 around the true value θ⋆ allows us to refine our
conclusions. In particular, in this setting, for any posterior Q concentrating around θ⋆ ,
the squared distance d2 (PQ , Pθ⋆ )2 behaves like ∥Eθ∼Q [θ] − θ⋆ ∥22 + Tr(Vθ∼Q [θ]). Thus, if
we chose a squared metric d1 (Q, Q′ )2 on posterior distributions that locally behaved like
∥Eθ∼Q [θ] − Eθ∼Q′ [θ]∥22 + ∥Vθ∼Q [θ] − Vθ∼Q′ [θ]∥2 for a suitable metric on matrices, we would
recover posterior concentration rates towards θ⋆ directly in the Euclidean distance. Put
differently, up to a local approximation, the notion of concentration used in Corollary 3
via such a metric d1 is equivalent to the classical definition of posterior concentration with
respect to the Euclidean distance for regular parametric models. In this setting, and if
α = 2, our results would now translate to a concentration rate of n−1/4 in the Euclidean
distance, which the reader will notice is slower than the standard n−1/2 rate that is usually
achievable in parametric models. Critically, this behaviour is not a feature of the PrO
posterior in particular, but of the temperature scaling employed within PAC-Bayes-type
48

bounds. Indeed, the n−1/4 rate we achieve in the Euclidean space is a direct consequence of
minimising our PAC-Bayes-type generalisation bounds for the PrO posterior by choosing
the rate λn ∝ n1/2 . Note that this result is entirely consistent with the application of PACBayes bounds to Gibbs posteriors: here too, one often obtains λn ∝ n1/2 by minimising
generalisation bounds, which would then also result in a n1/4 concentration rate on the
Euclidean space by the same arguments as before (see e.g. Alquier et al., 2016).

Appendix
Table of Contents
A Notations

50

B Lemmas

51

B.1 Existence and uniqueness of the minimiser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

54

C Proofs of Main results

56

D Further experimental details

64

D.1 Normal location illustrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

D.2 Palmer penguins example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

49

D.3 Regression with the MMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

66

D.4 Linear regression example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

67

D.5 Binary classification example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

69

D.6 River water flow example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

69

D.7 Time series cross-validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

70

D.8 Conditional auto-regression example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

70

E Computation

A

71

E.1 Examples: MMD and logarithmic score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

E.2 Practicalities and Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

72

Notations

In this section we re-describe the main notations introduced in the main text to ensure the
appendix is as self-contained as possible. We consider observed data x1:n = (x1 , . . . , xn ) for
xi ∈ X and i = 1, . . . , n, where each xi is generated from the true unknown distribution P0 .
We denote expectations of functions g : X → R with respect to X ∼ P0 by E[g(X)] or by
EX∼P0 [g(X)] if we wish to emphasise the distribution over which integration occurs. The
model class is given by MΘ := {Pθ : θ ∈ Θ} and a prior measure Π ∈ P(Θ) over elements of
R
MΘ . Likewise, let P(Θ) denote the set of distributions over Θ, and recall PQ = Pθ dQ(θ)
for Q ∈ P(Θ). The function S(P, x) denotes a scoring rule for the distribution P , while
S(P, P ) = EX∼P [S(P, X)] denotes the expected score, and DS (P, P0 ) = S(P, P0 )−S(P0 , P0 )
is the divergence associated to P , evaluated at the true distribution P0 . Further, define
Sn (Pθ ) = n1

Pn

1
i=1 S(Pθ , xi ), and Ln (θ1:k ) = n

Pn

in Assumption 2′ .
50

i=1 L(θ1:k , xi ), where L(θ1:k , x) is as defined

B

Lemmas

This section contains several useful lemmas that are used throughout the remainder of the
text. First, we demonstrate our claim that PrO posterior based on any kernel scoring
rule are tractable with k = 2. This implies that for scores based on squared maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD2 ) and Cumulative Ranked Probability Score (CRPS), the function
∆(Q, x) in (3) is constant in x.
To prove this, take x, x′ ∈ X , let κ(x, x′ ) denote a positive-definite kernel function with
feature map ϕ : X → H, such that κ(x, x′ ) = ⟨ϕ(x), ϕ(x′ )⟩H . For fixed θ ∈ Θ, define
R
the mean embedding µθ ∈ H by µθ := ϕ(z) dPθ (z) and the inner product ⟨µθ , µθ′ ⟩H =
RR
κ(z, z ′ ) dPθ (z)dPθ′ (z ′ ). Following Gneiting et al. (2007), all kernel scoring rules can be
expressed as S(P, x) = EX,X ′ ∼P [κ(X, X ′ )] − 2EX∼P [κ(X, x)] + κ(x, x).
Lemma 2. For any kernel scoring rule, and for all x ∈ X : (i) the score Pθ 7→ S(Pθ , x) is
R
convex; (ii) S(PQ , x) = L(θ1:2 , x)dQ2 (θ1:2 ) with L(θ1:2 , x) = S(Pθ1 , x) − 21 ∥µθ1 − µθ2 ∥2H .
Proof. To see that (i) is satisfied, use the feature map representation to write the score as
S(Pθ , x) = ∥µθ ∥2H − 2⟨µθ , ϕ(x)⟩H + ∥ϕ(x)∥2H .
The map Pθ 7→ µθ is linear, so that Pθ 7→ ∥µθ ∥2H is quadratic. Thus, Pθ 7→ S(Pθ , x) is the
composition of a linear map and a convex function, and so is convex. To deduce the second
result, write
Z
 Z
Z
 Z
S
Pθ dQ(θ), x = S(Pθ , x)dQ(θ) + S
Pθ dQ(θ), x − S(Pθ , x)dQ(θ) .
|
{z
}
=−∆(Q,x) in (3)

Expand the first integral, and use the mean embedding definition for µθ , to write
Z Z Z Z
S (PQ , x) =
κ(z, z ′ ) dPθ (z)dPθ′ (z ′ )dQ(θ)dQ(θ′ ) = ⟨Eθ∼Q (µθ ), Eθ′ ∼Q (µθ′ )⟩
= ∥Eθ∼Q (µθ )∥2H .
51

Similarly, write
Z

Z Z Z
S (Pθ , x) dQ(θ) =

κ(z, z ′ ) dPθ (z)dPθ (z ′ )dQ(θ) = Eθ∼Q [∥µθ ∥2H ].

Hence, for ∆(Q, x) as in (3),


−∆(Q, x) = ∥Eθ∼Q [µθ ]∥2H − Eθ∼Q [∥µθ ∥2H ] = −Eθ∼Q ∥µθ − Eθ′ ∼Q [µθ′ ]∥2H
Z
1
=−
∥µθ − µθ′ ∥2H dQ(θ)dQ(θ′ ).
2

Lemma 3. Under Assumptions 1-3, for any λn ≥ dS /r0 , we have

Z
E

dS
DS (Pθ , P0 )dQ†n (θ) ≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) +
λn

Furthermore, for the specific choice λn = n1/2

p


log

e · cS λn
dS



λn C 2
.
+
n

dS /C 2 log (e · cS /dS ), for any n ≥

dSC 2 
e·c
2
r0 log d S
S

we have
i
h 
E DS PQ†n , P0 ≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) + C (log n/n)1/2 .
Proof. The proof follows similar arguments to those used to prove Lemma 1 but where we
take L(θ, θ′ ) = R(θ) = S(Pθ , P0 ) − S(P0 , P0 ) and Ln (θ, θ′ ) = Rn (θ) = Sn (Pθ ) − Sn (P0 ). If
Assumption 2′ is satisfied for R(θ) − Rn (θ), then
Z
1≥E

eλn {R(θ)−Rn (θ)}−

2
λ2
nC
n

dΠ(θ).

Apply the Donsker-Varadhan lemma with h(θ) = R(θ) − Rn (θ) to obtain
R

1 ≥ EesupQ∈P(Θ) λn [R(θ)−Rn (θ)]dQ(θ)−KL(Q∥Π)−

2
λ2
nC
n

.

Apply Jensen’s inequity and take logs to obtain

0 ≥ E sup
Q∈P(Θ)

Z
λn

λ2 C 2
[R(θ) − Rn (θ)] dQ(θ) − KL(Q∥Π) − n
n
52


.

,

Since the above is true for any Q ∈ P(Θ), it is also true for Q = Q†n . Applying this choice
and re-arranging terms yields
Z
E

R(θ)dQ†n (θ) ≤ E

Z

KL(Q†n ∥Π) λn C 2
+
Rn (θ)dQ†n (θ) +
λn
n


.

Use the definitions of R(θ) and Rn (θ), and Assumption 1, to obtain the inequality
h
i
E S(PQ†n , P0 ) − S(P0 , P0 )

Z
†
≤E
{S(Pθ , P0 ) − S(P0 , P0 )}dQn (θ)
Z

λn C 2
KL(Q†n ∥Π)
†
≤E
+
{Sn (Pθ ) − Sn (P0 )} dQn (θ) +
λn
n

Z
λn C 2
KL(Q∥Π)
+
≤E inf
{Sn (Pθ ) − Sn (P0 )} dQ(θ) +
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
n
Z

KL(Q∥Π)
λn C 2
=E inf
.
{Sn (Pθ ) − Sn (P0 )} dQ(θ) +
+
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
n

(8)

(9)

Define the distributions ΠBr indexed by a radius r > 0 with corresponding density:
dΠBr (θ) :=

1(θ ∈ Br )dΠ(θ)
Π(Br )

with Br := {θ ∈ Θ : DS (Pθ , P0 ) ≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) + r} .

We can now further upper bound (8) by restricting the infimum on the right-hand side of
(9) to distributions belonging to the set {ΠBr : r > 0} ⊂ P(Θ), which yields

Z
E


KL(ΠBr ∥Π)
λn C 2
{Sn (Pθ ) − Sn (P0 )} dΠBr (θ) +
+
λn
n
Z

KL(ΠBr ∥Π)
λn C 2
≤ inf
DS (Pθ , P0 )dΠBr (θ) +
+
r>0
λn
n
(Z
)
log {1/Π(Br )}
λn C 2
= inf
DS (Pθ , P0 )dΠBr (θ) +
+
r>0
λn
n
(Z
)
dS log (cS /r)
λn C 2
≤ inf
{DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) + r} dΠBr (θ) +
+
0<r≤r0
λn
n


dS log (cS /r)
λn C 2
+
.
= DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) + inf
r+
0<r≤r0
λn
n

DS (Pθ , P0 )dQ†n (θ) ≤ E inf
r>0

Z

53

As soon as λn ≥ drS0 , taking r = λdSn ≤ r0 then leads to

Z
E


cS λn
λn C 2
log
+
dS
n


e · cS λn
λn C 2
dS
log
+
,
= DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) +
λn
dS
n


dS
dS
DS (Pθ , P0 )dQ†n (θ) ≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) +
+
λn λn

which establishes the first result.
r
1/2

To obtain the second, substitute λn = n
dSC 2 
e·c
2
r0 log d S
S

dS
C2

log



e·cS
dS



in the bound, for n ≥

, to obtain

Z
DS (Pθ , P0 )dQ†n (θ)

E

r  
e
·
c
S
S
√ log n1/2 √
√ s 

log e·c
d
S
C dS
e · cS
C dS
C dS
r  
≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) + 1/2
log
+ 1/2
,
n
n
dS
e·cS
log dS


and by convexity, Assumption 1 implies that E[DS (PQ†n , P0 )] ≤ E

R

DS (Pθ , P0 )dQ†n (θ),

which ends the proof.

B.1

Existence and uniqueness of the minimiser

It is interesting to investigate the sufficient conditions under which the objective of (7)
admits a unique minimiser. We posit two assumptions in order to do so: one on the score
and the other on the prior.
Lemma 4. Suppose that Assumption 1 holds and further that the score is bounded from
below so that inf Q∈P(Θ) L (Q) = M > −∞. Assume further that the prior Π admits density
with respect to the Lebesgue measure dΠ(θ) ∝ exp{−U (θ)} for U : Θ → R such that:
(i) there exist constants c > 0 and c′ ∈ R such that for all θ ∈ Θ,
∇θ U (θ) · θ ≥ c∥θ∥2 + c′ ,
and,
54

(ii) ∇θ U is Lipschitz continuous.
Then there exists a unique measure Qn ∈ P(Θ) such that Qn = arginf Q∈P(Θ) L , and further
this Qn is characterised by the implicit equation

n
 λ X
δS(PQ , xi )
n
dQn (θ) ∝ dΠ(θ) · exp −
 n
δQ
i=1

(θ)




.



Q=Qn

Proof. We have by Assumption 1 that the score S(·, x) is convex is its first argument. In
combination with the fact that the mapping Q 7→ PQ is linear, we have the the mapping
Q 7→ S(PQ , x) is convex. The existence and uniqueness of a minimiser is then provided
under the same conditions in Proposition 2.5 of Hu et al. (2020), and we point the reader
to their Section 4 for a proof.
To characterise the form of this minimiser, we take the functional derivative of (7) with
respect to Q, set it equal to zero, and solve for Q. We begin by noting that the functional
derivative of the KL regulariser evaluated at θ is given by

dQ
(θ) ,
dΠ

(10)

λn X δS(PQ , xi )
(θ).
n i=1
δQ

(11)


1 + log
while that of the score term is
n

By the linearity of functional derivatives, setting the sum of (10) and (11) equal to zero
and removing constant terms, we find that Qn must satisfy
n

λn X δS(PQ , xi )
0=
(θ) + log
n i=1
δQ
Q=Qn



dQn
(θ)
dΠ



whence rearranging yields the stated result.
The prior coercivity conditions of (i) and (ii) are satisfied, for instance, by choosing the
prior to be a multivariate standard Gaussian prior, common to many applications (Hu et al.,
55

2020). And the condition that the infimum be attained at non-infinite M is immediate, for
example, for the squared MMD under bounded kernels (see also Shen et al., 2025, Theorem
1). In the case of the log score, we refer the reader to Liu et al. (2025, Proposition 1) who
establish the necessary conditions.

C

Proofs of Main results

Proof of Lemma 1. The result depends on slightly different arguments depending on whether
Assumption 2 or Assumption 2′ is satisfied. Therefore, we break the result into cases.
Scores Satisfying Assumption 2′ . Consider any fixed integer k > 1. Recall Qk =
Nk

j=1 Q.

Apply the Donsker-Varadhan Lemma with h(θ1:k ) = kλn {L(θ1:k ) − Ln (θ1:k )}, to

see that, P0 -almost surely, ∀Q ∈ P(Θ), we have

Z

Z
k

k

k

kλn {L(θ1:k ) − Ln (θ1:k )} dQ (θ1:k ) ≤ KL(Q ∥Π ) + log

ekλn {L(θ1:k )−Ln (θ1:k )} dΠk (θ1:k ).

Rearranging terms, we have P0 -almost surely, ∀Q ∈ P(Θ),

Z

Z
L(θ1:k )dQk (θ1:k ) ≤

KL(Qk ∥Πk ) log
Ln (θ1:k )dQk (θ1:k )+
+
kλn

R

ekλn {L(θ1:k )−Ln (θ1:k )} dΠk (θ1:k )
,
kλn

R

ekλn {L(θ1:k )−Ln (θ1:k )} dΠk (θ1:k )
.
kλn

and P0 -almost surely, for Q = Qn in particular:

Z

Z
L(θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) ≤

KL(Qkn ∥Πk ) log
Ln (θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k )+
+
kλn

Taking expectation with respect to P0 on both sides and applying Jensen’s inequality to
the log then leads to:

Z

Z
E

Ln (θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) +

L(θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) ≤ E

Z
≤E

Ln (θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) +

56

EKL(Qkn ∥Πk )
kλn
EKL(Qkn ∥Πk )
kλn

+
+

E log

R

ekλn {L(θ1:k )−Ln (θ1:k )} dΠk (θ1:k )
kλn

log E

R

ekλn {L(θ1:k )−Ln (θ1:k )} dΠk (θ1:k )
.
kλn

The last term on the right-hand-side is controlled using Tonelli’s theorem and Assumption
2′ (ii), under which:

Z

Z
ekλn {L(θ1:k )−Ln (θ1:k )} dΠk (θ1:k ) = log

log E

Eekλn {L(θ1:k )−Ln (θ1:k )} dΠk (θ1:k ) ≤

k 2 λ2n C 2
,
n

which then gives

Z
E

Z

EKL(Qkn ∥Πk ) λn kC 2
+
kλn
n
"Z
#
KL(Qkn ∥Πk )
λn kC 2
=E
+
.
Ln (θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) +
kλn
n

L(θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) ≤ E

Ln (θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) +

Recall that Qn is the minimiser of the quantity inside the expectation on the right-hand-side
to finally write:
"

Z
L(θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) ≤ E

E

Now, we lower bound

R

(Z
inf

Q∈P(Θ)

KL(Qk ∥Πk )
Ln (θ1:k )dQk (θ1:k ) +
kλn

)#
+

λn kC 2
.
n

L(θ1:k )dQkn (θ1:k ) on the left-hand-side: using the convexity in

Assumption 1 and the structure of the loss in Assumption 2′ (i), we have
Z
S


Pθ dQn (θ), P0

Z
S(Pθ , P0 )dQn (θ) − E{∆(Qn , X)}

=
Z
≤

Z
S(Pθ , P0 )dQn (θ) −

Q∈P(Θ)

Z

δ(θ1:k )dQ (θ1:k ) ≡

where δ(θ1:k ) = E[δ(θ1:k , X)]. Recalling that PQn =
(Z
E [S (PQn , P0 )] ≤ E inf

k

L(θ1:k )dQn (θ1:k ),

R

Pθ dQn (θ), this gives us
)
k
k
KL(Q
∥Π
)
λn kC 2
Ln (θ1:k )dQk (θ1:k ) +
+
.
kλn
n

Using Assumption 2′ (i), we can rewrite equation (12) as
"
(Z

KL(Qk ∥Πk )
E {S (PQn , P0 )} ≤ E inf
Ln (θ1:k )dQk (θ1:k ) +
Q∈P(Θ)
kλn



KL(Qk ∥Πk )
λn kC 2
= E inf
Sn (PQ ) +
+
Q∈P(Θ)
kλn
n


KL(Qk ∥Πk )
λn kC 2
≤ inf
S(PQ , P0 ) +
+
.
Q∈P(Θ)
kλn
n
57

)#
+

λn kC 2
n

(12)

Recalling that S(P0 , P0 ) = ESn (P0 ), we subtract S(P0 , P0 ) from both sides and write
E{DS (PQn , P0 )} = E {S (PQn , P0 ) − S(P0 , P0 )}


λn kC 2
KL(Qk ∥Πk )
+
≤ inf
S(P0 , P0 ) − S(PQ , P0 ) +
Q∈P(Θ)
kλn
n


KL(Qk ∥Πk )
λn kC 2
= inf
D(PQ , P0 ) +
+
Q∈P(Θ)
kλn
n


KL(Q∥Π)
λn kC 2
= inf
D(PQ , P0 ) +
+
.
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
n
Scores Satisfying Assumption 2. For scores that do not satisfy Assumption 2′ , the
above proof technique breaks down. We can, however, derive a similar bound using the
variational definition of Qn .
From the definition of D(PQ , P0 ), we have
E[DS (PQn , P0 )] = E[S(PQn , P0 )] − S(P0 , P0 )

(13)

= E[Sn (PQn )] − S(P0 , P0 ) − {E[Sn (PQn )] − E[S(PQn , P0 )]}
≤ E[Sn (PQn )] − S(P0 , P0 ) + E sup |Sn (PQ ) − S(PQ , P0 )|
Q∈PΠ (Θ)

≤ E[Sn (PQn )] − S(P0 , P0 ) + rn ,

(14)

where the last line follows from Assumption 2. Using the variational definition of Qn , we
have


KL(Qn ∥Π)
KL(Q∥Π)
Sn (PQn ) ≤ Sn (PQn ) +
= inf
Sn (PQ ) +
.
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
λn
Taking expectations then yields




KL(Q∥Π)
KL(Q∥Π)
E Sn (PQn ) ≤ E inf
Sn (PQ ) +
≤ inf
S(PQ , P0 ) +
.
Q∈P(Θ)
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
λn




(15)

58

Plugging equation (15) into (14) yields
E[DS (PQn , P0 )] = E[S(PQn , P0 )] − S(P0 , P0 )


KL(Q∥Π)
≤ inf
S(PQ , P0 ) +
− S(P0 , P0 ) + rn
Q∈P(Θ)
λn


KL(Q∥Π)
+ rn .
= inf
DS (PQ , P0 ) +
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
The stated result now follows from the definition of νn .
Proof of Theorem 2. From the convexity in Assumption 1,
Z
DS (PQ , P0 ) ≤

DS (Pθ , P0 )dQ(θ).

Applying bound in the RHS of Lemma 1 delivers



KL(Q∥Π)
E[DS (PQn , P0 )] ≤ inf
DS (PQ , P0 ) +
+ νn
Q∈P(Θ)
λn

Z
KL(Q∥Π)
+ νn .
≤ inf
DS (Pθ , P0 )dQ(θ) +
Q∈P(Θ)
λn

(16)

Recalling the definition of Br in Assumption 3, define the candidate density
dΠBr (θ) :=

1(θ ∈ Br )dΠ(θ)
.
Π(Br )

Now, the RHS of the inequality in (16) is true for any Q ∈ P(Θ), and remains true for
Q = ΠBn . For 0 ≤ r ≤ r0 , over Br , DS (Pθ , P0 ) ≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) + r, so that we obtain

KL(ΠkBr ∥Πk )
E [DS (PQn , P0 )] ≤ inf
DS (Pθ , P0 )dΠBr (θ) +
+ νn ,
r>0
kλn
Z

KL(ΠBr ∥Π)
= inf
DS (Pθ , P0 )dΠBr (θ) +
+ νn
r>0
λn
Z

log {1/Π(Br )}
= inf
DS (Pθ , P0 )dΠBr (θ) +
+ νn ,
r>0
λn
Z

dS log(cS /r)
≤ inf
{DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) + r} dΠBr (θ) +
+ νn
r0 ≥r>0
λn


dS log(cS /r)
= DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) + inf
r+
+ νn .
r0 ≥r>0
λn
Z

59

The remainder of the proof follows the same as in the proof of Lemma 3.
A similar argument holds for Q†n .

Proof of Theorem 3. Assumption 4 ensures the existence of some Q⋆ ∈ arg inf Q∈P(Θ) DS (PQ , P0 )
such that
JenGap := DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) − DS (PQ⋆ , P0 ) > 0.
From Lemma 1, we can obtain:


Z

E DS


Pθ dQn (θ), P0


 Z

KL(Q∥Π)
+ νn
Pθ dQ(θ), P0 +
≤ inf
DS
Q∈P(Θ)
λn

 Z

KL(Q∥Π)
= inf DS
+ νn
Pθ dQ(θ), P0 +
Q≪Π
λn

Z
KL(Q⋆ ∥Π)
⋆
Pθ dQ (θ), P0 +
+ νn .
(17)
≤ DS
λn

Adding and subtracting DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) and using the definition of JenGap, we can re-arrange
(17) as
 Z

KL(Q⋆ ∥Π)
+ νn − JenGap.
E DS
Pθ dQn (θ), P0
≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) +
λn
Since, by Assumption 4, Q⋆ is such that KL(Q⋆ ∥Π) < ∞, for n large enough we have
KL(Q⋆ ∥Π)
1
+ νn ≤ JenGap ,
λn
4
so that


Z

E DS


Pθ dQn (θ), P0

3
≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) − JenGap .
4

Furthermore, from the continuity of θ 7→ Pθ in Assumption 4, and the concentration in
Lemma 3, we have for n large enough but finite,

E DS

Z

Pθ dQ†n (θ), P0


≥ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) −

60

JenGap
.
4

Therefore, for n large enough but finite,


Z

E DS


Pθ dQn (θ), P0

3
≤ DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) − JenGap
4
 Z

1
†
≤ E DS
Pθ dQn (θ), P0
− JenGap
2
 Z

< E DS
Pθ dQ†n (θ), P0 .

To obtain the second result, return to equation (17), and use the fact that Q⋆ ∈
arginf Q∈P(Θ) DS (PQ , P0 ) satisfies KL(Q⋆ ∥Π) < ∞, by Assumption 4, to obtain


Z

E DS


Pθ dQn (θ), P0


≤

inf
Q∈P(Θ)

Z
DS


Pθ dQ(θ), P0

KL(Q∥Π)
+
λn


+ νn

KL(Q⋆ ∥Π)
≤ DS (P , P0 ) +
+ νn
λn
C
≤ DS (PQ⋆ , P0 ) +
+ νn .
λn
Q⋆

In the case of Assumption 2′ , νn = log(n)/n1/2 so that choosing λn ∝ n1/2 / log(n) yields the
stated result. In the case of Assumption 2, νn = min{log(n)/n1/2 , rn }, and again choosing
λn ∝ n1/2 log(n) also implies the stated result.
Proof of Theorem 4. We break the result up into cases depending on whether (i) or (ii) in
Assumption 5 is satisfied.
Assumption 5(i). From equation (17) in the proof of Theorem 3, we have that

 Z

KL(Q∥Π)
+ νn
E [DS (PQn , P0 )] ≤ inf
DS
Pθ dQ(θ), P0 +
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
 Z


KL(Q∥Π)
≤ inf DS
Pθ dQ(θ), P0 +
+ νn
Q≪Π
λn
= DS (PQ⋆ , P0 ) +

C
+ νn ,
λn

where the equality follows from the fact that KL(Q⋆ ∥Π) < ∞, and the last inequality
follows by taking λn ∝ n1/2 / log(n) so that C/λn + νn ≤ C ′ · νn , for n large enough. We
remind the reader that DS (PQ⋆ , P0 ) = 0 under Assumption 5(i).
61

Since DS (PQ⋆ , P0 ) = 0 under convex recovery, we have
JenGap = DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 ) > 0,
and there exist an n large enough so that
DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 )
.
2
h 
i
Further, for n large enough, as in the proof of Theorem 3, E DS PQ†n , P0 > DS (P2θ⋆ ,P0 ) .
E [DS (PQn , P0 )] ≤ C ′ νn ≤

Putting these inequalities together, we see that, for n large enough,
E [DS (PQn , P0 )] ≤

h 
i
DS (Pθ⋆ , P0 )
< E DS PQ†n , P0 .
2

Assumption 5(ii). Recall Br,j = {θ : DS (Pθ , Pθj⋆ ) ≤ r}, denote dQ⋆r (θ) =

PK

⋆
j=1 ωj dΠr,j (θ)

where ω ∈ ∆K−1 , and
dΠ⋆r,j (θ) =




dΠ(θ)

 Π(B
)

if θ ∈ Br,j




0

else

r,j

.

Using Q⋆r within equation (17) in the proof of Theorem 3, yields
E [DS (PQn , P0 )]

 Z

λn kCk2
KL(Q∥Π)
≤ inf
+
DS
Pθ dQ(θ), P0 +
Q∈P(Θ)
λn
n

 Z

KL(Q⋆r ∥Π)
≤ inf DS
+ νn
Pθ dQ⋆r (θ), P0 +
r>0
λn

P

!
K
⋆
Z
K
K


∥Π
KL
ω
Π
X
X
j=1 j r,j
= inf DS
ωj Pθ dΠ⋆r,j (θ),
ωj Pθj⋆ +
+ νn
r>0 

λ
n
j=1
j=1
(K
)
PK
Z
⋆


X
ω
KL
Π
∥Π
j
r,j
j=1
+ νn
≤ inf
ωj
DS Pθ , Pθj⋆ dΠ⋆r,j (θ) +
r>0
λ
n
j=1
(K
)
PK


X Z
ω
log{1/Π(B
)}
j
r,j
j=1
≤ inf
ωj
DS Pθ , Pθj⋆ dΠ⋆r,j (θ) +
+ νn
r>0
λn
j=1
(K
)


X Z
d
log(c
/r)
s
s
≤ inf
ωj
DS Pθ , Pθj⋆ dΠ⋆r,j (θ) +
+ νn
r>0
λ
n
j=1


ds log(cs /r)
≤ inf r +
+ νn .
r>0
λn
62

Optimising r using similar arguments to the end of Lemma 3 yields the stated result.
Proof of Corollary 2. The proof follows directly from Theorem 4; in particular,
E [DS (PQn , P0 )] − E[DS (PQ†n , P0 )] ≤ E [DS (PQn , P0 )] ≲ νn .

Proof of Corollary 3 . Since d2 (·, ·) satisfies a weak triangle inequality, for some C > 0,
E[d2 (PQn , PQ⋆ )] ≤ CE{d2 (PQn , P0 ) + d2 (PQ⋆ , P0 )}
= Cd2 (PQn , P0 )
= Cd2 (PQn , PQ⋆ ),

(18)

where the equalities follows from the definition of convex recovery. Recall that, by Theorem
4, E[DS (PQn , P0 )] ≤ νn . Hence, from Assumption 6(iii), and concavity of the map x 7→ x1/α
for α ≥ 1,
E[d2 (PQn , PQ⋆ )] ≤E[DS (PQn , PQ⋆ )1/α ] ≤ {E[DS (PQn , PQ⋆ )]}1/α ≤ νn1/α .

(19)

From equation (19), and Assumption 6(i) - identifiability and continuity of θ 7→ Pθ conclude that PQn → P0 . Hence, by Assumption 6(ii) and the convergence in (19), there
exists n1 large enough so that, for n ≥ n1 ,
E[d1 (Qn , Q⋆ )] ≤ CE[d2 (PQn , PQ⋆ )].
Hence, for n ≥ n1 , we can apply the above and equation (19) to obtain
E[d1 (Qn , Q⋆ )] ≤ CE[d2 (PQn , PQ⋆ )] ≤ C · νn1/α .

63

D

Further experimental details

D.1

Normal location illustrations

We simulate n = 1, 000 data from each of the data-generating processes:
yi ∼ N(0, 12 )




N(−2, 12 ),
yi ∼



N(2, 12 ),





N(−2, 12 ),





yi ∼ N(0, 12 ),








N(2, 12 ),

(“Well-specified”)
with probability 0.2
(“Mixture”)
with probability 0.8
with probability 1/3
with probability 1/3

(“Claw”)

with probability 1/3

yi ∼ Student − t1.5

(“Heavy-tails”).

For each of these, we estimate the MMD with m = 128 Monte Carlo samples, run the
Wasserstein gradient flow for p = 32 particles for all data, and for 4, 000 iterations similarly
to MALA. We use λn = n. We show the posterior distributions of the Gibbs and PrO
posteriors and the Wasserstein gradient flow trajectories in Figure 12, and in Figure 13 we
show their induced predictive distributions.

D.2

Palmer penguins example

The data containing n = 342 measurements of the penguins’ bill lengths and depths in
millimetres were imported from the palmerpenguins package in Python, and jointly centred
to have zero-mean and scaled to have unit variance. To these data we fit a Gaussian kernel
density estimator implemented in sklearn (Pedregosa et al., 2011), where the bandwidth
was chosen with cross-validation across a logarithmic grid. We also fit for comparison a
64

Figure 12: In the left-most column we show the particle trajectories from a Wasserstein gradient flow
targeting the PrO posterior compared to the path of a single MALA chain targeting the Gibbs
posterior. In the two axes on the right we show the empirical posterior densities from these two
trajectories.

PrO posterior over the mean of an the isotropic bivariate Gaussian location model class,
MΘ = {N(θ, σ 2 I) : θ ∈ R2 }, where σ 2 = 0.2 is fixed, and which we fit with the squared

65

Figure 13: A comparison of PrO and Gibbs posterior predictive distributions in a well-specified
and three misspecified regimes. Grey bars indicate a histogram of the observed data.

MMD score. This same bandwidth was used for fitting the PrO posterior with the squared
MMD as fitting the KDE. We estimated the PrO posterior under the squared MMD loss
approximated with m = n samples, λn = 103 , and the Wasserstein gradient flow was run
with p = 32 particles for 10, 000 iterations.

D.3

Regression with the MMD

Denote d = dim(Θ). In Sections 2, 5.2, and 5.3 we fit the linear models under the squared
2
d
MMD loss. Denote the model class as {N(yi ; x⊤
i θ, σ ) : θ ∈ R }, for i = 1, . . . , n where

σ 2 > 0 is treated as fixed and estimated from data:
2

σ̂ =

n
X
(yi − ŷi )

n−d−1
i=1

;

ŷ = X β̂;

β̂ = (X ⊤ X)−1 X ⊤ y.

In the case of the Gibbs posterior, we use the efficient estimator proposed by Alquier and
Gerber (2024, Equation 6):
Sn (Pθ ) =

n
X

ℓ† (θ; Xi , yi )

i=1

where for all θ ∈ Θ, x ∈ Rd , and y ∈ R,
ℓ† (θ; X, y) = EY,Y ′ ∼Pθ (·|x) {κ(Y, Y ′ ) − 2κ(Y, y)}.

66

In practice we estimate both of these expectations with m Monte Carlo draws:
m
XX
2
1
κ(Yi , Yj′ ) − κ(Yi , y),
ℓ (θ; X, y) ≈
m(m − 1) i̸=j j=1
m
†

for Yi , Yi′ ∼ Pθ (· | x).
In the case of the PrO posterior, we instead use the tandem loss
Ln (ϑ, θ) =

n
X

ℓ(ϑ, θ; Xi , yi )

i=1

where now
ℓ(ϑ, θ; X, y) = E Y ∼Pϑ (·|x) {κ(Y, Y ′ ) − κ(Y, y) − κ(Y ′ , y)}.
Y ′ ∼Pθ (·|x)

And again, each of these expectations can be approximated by Monte Carlo:
m

ℓ(ϑ, θ; X, y) ≈

m

1
1 XX
1
′
κ(Y
,
y)
−
κ(Yi′ , y),
κ(Y
,
Y
)
−
i
i
j
m2 i=1 j=1
m
m

for Yi ∼ Pϑ (· | x) and Yi′ ∼ Pθ (· | x).
In both cases, we use a Gaussian kernel where the length scale is chosen according to
the median heuristic (Garreau et al., 2018).

D.4

Linear regression example

In Section 2 we generate n = 500 training data for each of the three misspecification
regimes. The log point-wise predictive density (lppd) is estimated from S samples from
the posterior {θ(s) }Ss=1 at a test point {Xi , yi } through
(
lppdi = log

)
S
1X
P (s) (yi | Xi ) .
S s=1 θ

and similarly we compute the test point-wise MMD2i with posterior draws. We subsequently
compute the expected log predictive density (elpd) as elpdtest =

Pntest
i=1

lppdi , and likewise

for MMD2test , for ntest = 1, 000. In Figure 2 we show the mean and standard error of the
67

a normal approximation to the difference in these metrics inline with Sivula et al. (2025,
in
− lppdGibbs
Equations 9 and 10). Denoting the point-wise difference as ∆i = lppdPrO
i
i
the case of the elpd, for example, the mean is computed as
error as

Pntest
i=1

∆i , and the standard

v
(
)2
u
n
test
test
u ntest nX
X
1
t
∆i −
∆j .
ntest − 1 i=1
n j=1

In Figure 2 we rescale both metrics so that negative values indicate that the PrO posterior
induces better predictive performance. The continuously ranked probability score (CRPS)
was approximated using posterior samples and an empirical cumulative distribution function using the properscoring package in Python.
The MMD was estimated using m = 32 Monte Carlo samples, and the Wasserstein
gradient flow was run using p = 16 particles and λn = n1/2 for 4, 000 iterations, while
MALA was run with dt = 10−4 also for 4, 000 iterations after 96, 000 warmup iterations to
ensure convergence.

D.4.1

Sensitivity of the Wasserstein gradient flow

In Figure 14 we show the sensitivity of the kernel gradient discrepancy (a diagnostic of the
quality of the posterior samples) and two predictive scores to the choice of the number of
particles and step size in a linear regression example. We sample n = 500 data from the
CR setting described in Section 2, and then fit the PrO posterior with p = {21 , 22 , . . . , 26 }
particles and dt between 0.1 and 0.0001. In each case, we set λn = n1/2 and run the
WGF for 10, 000 iterations and estimate the MMD with m = 32 Monte Carlo samples. In
Figure 14 we report the mean of the kernel gradient discrepancy (KGD), and predictive
negative log likelihood (NLL) and MMD from 10 fold cross-validation. All metrics are
improved as dt is smaller, and as the number of particles grows. We observed here, and in

68

other experiments, that as long as the number of particles is sufficiently large to capture
multi-modal behaviour in the data, the step size becomes important to tune appropriately.
And that the relationship relationship between predictive performance and step size is not
always linear. This observation led us to choose p of the order ≈ 25 , and optimise the step
size in all experiments with the tuning-free FUSE schedule (Sharrock and Nemeth, 2025).

(a) Posterior diagnostic.

(b) Predictive metrics.
Figure 14: Synthetic linear regression example.

D.5

Binary classification example

We simulated n = 1, 000 in the manner described in Section 5.1, and fit all models with
λn = n1/2 . The PrO posterior was run with p = 64 particles for 10, 000 iterations. MALA
was run for 4, 000 steps with dt = 10−4 .

D.6

River water flow example

We fit an AR(7) model with Student-t prior over the intercept β, and Minnesota-style
priors over the regression coefficients θ:
Π(β) ∼ t3 (0, 12 )


1
Π(θj ) ∼ N 0, 2 ,
j
69

j = 1, . . . 7.

The PrO posterior was run with p = 50 particles for 10, 000 iterations. MALA was run
for 4, 000 steps after 46, 000 warmup iterations, with dt = 10−6 . The MMD was estimated
with m = 32 Monte Carlo samples, and both models were fit with λn = n1/2 .

D.7

Time series cross-validation

Following Bürkner et al. (2020), suppose we have T observations from a time series,
yi , . . . , yT , and let L be the minimum number of observations from the series that we will
require before making predictions for future data. Then we want to evaluate the predictive
performance of M one-step-ahead predictions made by the model, starting with its perforR
mance on the L + 1-th datum: Pθ (yL+1 )dQn (θ | y1:L ). For instance, the leave-future-out
cross-validated one-step-ahead log score is given as
T −1
X

Z
log

Pθ (yi+1 | y1:i )dQn (θ | y1:i ),

i=L

and we compute the MMD2 and RMSE similarly: fitting the model on i data and evaluating
on the the i + 1-th datum because incrementing the index i by one until we have no more
observations on which to evaluate. This procedure is elegantly visualised in Figure 1 of
Bürkner et al. (2020).

D.8

Conditional auto-regression example

The PrO posterior under the MMD was run with p = 16 particles for 2, 000 iterations.
MALA was run for 4, 000 steps after 96, 000 warmup iterations, with dt = 10−6 . The MMD
was estimated with m = 32 Monte Carlo samples, and both models were fit with λn = n1/2 .
In the case of the log score, the Gibbs posterior is fit with the same hyper-parameters as
described above, while the PrO posterior is now fit with p = 128 particles with 4, 000
iterations.
70

Figure 15: The empirical data distribution of the median housing value by census tract.

E

Computation

E.1

Examples: MMD and logarithmic score

Our above development recovers the algorithm of Shen et al. (2025) for the special case
of squared MMD. Here, elementary calculations show that for LMMD (ϑ, θ; x) = ⟨µ(Pϑ ) −
µ(δx ), µ(Pθ ) − µ(δx )⟩H and ∇1 LMMD (ϑ, θ; x) denoting its gradient with respect to ϑ,
n

1X
W(Q)[ϑ] =
n i=1

Z
∇1 LMMD (ϑ, θ; xi ) dQ(θ),

so that the evolution equations take the form




p
n

 1
X λn X
√
(j)
(j)
(ℓ)
(j)
(j)
∇1 LMMD (ϑt , ϑt ; xi ) − ∇ϑ log dΠ(ϑt ) dt + 2dBt .
dϑt = −


(p
−
1)
n


i=1
ℓ=1
ℓ̸=j

For the logarithmic scoring rule, one instead finds that
n

1 X ∇ϑ dPϑ (xi )
R
W(q)[ϑ] =
,
n i=1 dPθ (xi )dQ(θ)
so that the evolution equations are recovered as


n
λ X

∇
dP
(j) (xi )
√
ϑ
ϑt
n
(j)
(j)
(j)
P
dϑt = −
−
∇
log
dΠ(ϑ
)
dt
+
2dBt .
ϑ
t
p
1
n

ℓ=1 dPϑ(ℓ) (xi )
i=1 (p−1)
ℓ̸=j

t

71

E.2

Practicalities and Implementation

To provide intuition about how the sampling algorithm described in this section differs
from more conventional Bayesian computation procedures, Figure 12 compares it to the
Metropolis adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA; Roberts and Tweedie, 1996; Roberts and
Rosenthal, 1998) on several normal location examples. While the p = 32 particles which
target the PrO posterior are initialised randomly from the prior, they soon repel each
other, and lead to a multi-modal distribution. In contrast, the single particle evolved
according to MALA bounces around a singular mode.
While the interacting particle approach has the distinct advantage of being able to
sample from any PrO posterior, it introduces several hyper-parameters that may require
careful tuning in practice. The most important of these are the step sizes for the discretisation of the underlying SDE, the number of particles p, as well as the exact choice of λn .
Here, the choice of step size and the number of particles p constitute a direct trade-off
between approximation quality and computational efficiency: choosing the step size too
small or the number of particles too large will in principle increase accuracy, but do so
at the cost of exploding computational cost and substantively slowed convergence. Determining what constituted an appropriate step size in particular, is non-trivial and an active
area of research. Concurrently, Sharrock and Nemeth (2025) developed an adaptive step
size schedule for sampling form mean-field Langevin dynamics by adaptively tuning the
step size, which they call FUSE. We set the step size adaptively according to FUSE in
all experiments. While the theoretical result those authors showed do not extend to the
PrO posterior, our empirical results give promise that similar results are attainable. We
leave this as an area of future research. The relationship between the dimensionality of
Θ and the number of particles required for consistent estimation has been investigated in

72

the related family of Stein variational gradient descent algorithms by Banerjee et al. (2025,
Theorems 1 and 4). While those authors found that the number of particles must scale
polynomially or exponentially with the dimension of the problem, we observed that when
the step size is chosen with FUSE that much fewer particles are required. While little is
known about choosing these hyper-parameters in our setting, recent work by Chazal et al.
(2025) may finally provide a principled way for diagnosing this (see, e.g., Appendix D.4.1
for a numerical demonstration). In contrast, we have clear ideas on how λn should be set
from the theory developed in Section 3: for the case covered in Theorem 1 this is means
setting λn ≍ n1/2 / log(n).

73

